

--- Page 1 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

EASY HEALTH

Preamble

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited will cover all Insured Persons under this Policy upto the
Sum Insured. The insurance cover is governed by, and subject to, the terms, conditions and exclusions of
this Policy.

Section A. Other Important Terms You should know

The terms defined below and at other junctures in the Policy Wording have the meanings ascribed to
them wherever they appear in this Policy and, where appropriate, references to the singular include
references to the plural; references to the male include the female and references to any statutory
enactment include subsequent changes to the same:
1. Standard Definitions
Def. 1. Accident means a sudden, unforeseen and involuntary event caused by external, visible and
violent means.

Def. 2. Any one illness means continuous Period of illness and it includes relapse within 45 days
from the date of last consultation with the Hospital/Nursing Home where treatment may
have been taken.

Def. 3. AYUSH HOSPITAL means an AYUSH Hospital is a healthcare facility wherein
medical/surgical/para-surgical treatment procedures and interventions are carried out by
AYUSH Medical Practitioner(s) comprising of any of the following:
a. Central or State Government AYUSH Hospital; or

b. Teaching hospital attached to AYUSH College recognized by the Central Government
/Central Council of Indian Medicine/Central Council for Homeopathy; or
c. AYUSH Hospital, standalone or co-located within-patient healthcare facility of any
recognized system of medicine, registered with the local authorities, wherever
applicable, and is under the supervision of a qualified registered AYUSH Medical
Practitioner and must comply with all the following criterion:
i. Having at least 5 in-patient beds;
ii. Having qualified AYUSH Medical Practitioner in charge round the clock;
iii. . Having dedicated AYUSH therapy sections as required and/or has equipped
operation theatre where surgical procedures are to be carried out;
iv. Maintaining daily records of the patients and making them accessible to the
insurance company’s authorized representative.

Def. 4. AYUSH Day Care Centre means and includes Community Health Centre (CHC), Primary
Health Centre (PHC), Dispensary, Clinic, Polyclinic or any such health centre which is registered
with the local authorities, wherever applicable and having facilities for carrying out treatment
procedures and medical or surgical/para-surgical interventions or both under the supervision of
registered AYUSH Medical Practitioner(s) on day care basis without in-patient services and must
comply with all the following criterion:

i. Having qualified registered AYUSH Medical Practitioner (s) in charge;
ii. Having dedicated AYUSH therapy sections as required and/or has equipped operation
theatre where surgical procedures are to be carried out;
iii. Maintaining daily records of the patients and making them accessible to the insurance
company’s authorized representative.

Def. 5. Cashless facility means a facility extended by the insurer to the insured where the payments,
of the costs of treatment undergone by the insured in accordance with the policy terms and

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
1|Page

--- Page 2 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

conditions, are directly made to the network provider by the insurer to the extent pre-
authorization approved.

Def. 6. Condition Precedent means a policy term or condition upon which the Insurer’s liability
under the policy is conditional upon.

Def. 7. Congenital Anomaly refers to a condition(s) which is present since birth, and which is
abnormal with reference to form, structure or position

(a) Internal Congenital Anomaly - Congenital Anomaly which is not in the visible and
accessible parts of the body

(b) External Congenital Anomaly- Congenital Anomaly which is in the visible and
accessible parts of the body

Def. 8. Co-payment means a cost-sharing requirement under a health insurance policy that
provides that the policyholder/insured will bear a specified percentage of the admissible claim
amount. A co-payment does not reduce the Sum Insured.

Def. 9. Cumulative Bonus means any increase in the Sum Insured granted by the insurer without
an associated increase in premium.

Def. 10. Critical Illness means Cancer of specified severity, Open Chest CABG, First Heart Attack of
specified severity, Kidney Failure requiring regular dialysis, Major Organ/Bone Marrow
Transplant, Multiple Sclerosis with Persisting Symptoms, Permanent Paralysis of Limbs, Stroke
resulting in Permanent Symptoms as defined below only:

i) Cancer of specified severity:
A malignant tumour characterised by the uncontrolled growth & spread of malignant
cells with invasion & destruction of normal tissues. This diagnosis must be supported
by histological evidence of malignancy & confirmed by a pathologist.
The term cancer includes leukemia, lymphoma and sarcoma.
The following are excluded:
= Tumours showing the malignant changes of carcinoma in situ & tumours
which are histologically described as pre-malignant or non-invasive, including
but not limited to: Carcinoma in situ of breasts, Cervical dysplasia CIN-1, CIN -
2 & CIN-3.
= Any skin cancer other than invasive malignant melanoma
= All tumours of the prostate unless histologically classified as having a Gleason
score greater than 6 or having progressed to at least clinical TNM classification
T2NOMO.........
=" Papillary micro - carcinoma of the thyroid less than 1 cm in diameter
=" Chronic lymphocyctic leukaemia less than RAI stage 3
= Microcarcinoma of the bladder
= All tumours in the presence of HIV infection.

ii) Open Chest CABG:

The actual undergoing of open chest surgery for the correction of one or more
coronary arteries, which is/are narrowed or blocked, by coronary artery bypass graft
(CABG). The Diagnosis must be supported by coronary angiography and realisation of
the surgery has to be confirmed by a specialist Medical Practitioner
The following are excluded:

= Angioplasty and / or Any other intra-arterial procedures

= Any Key-hole surgery or laser surgery

iii) First Heart Attack of Specified Severity:

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
2|Page

--- Page 3 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

The first occurrence of myocardial infarction which means the death of a portion of the
heart muscle as a result of inadequate blood supply to the relevant area.
The diagnosis for this will be evidenced by all of the following criteria:
=" A history of typical clinical symptoms consistent with the diagnosis of Acute
Myocardial Infarction (for e.g. typical chest pain).
= New characteristic electrocardiogram changes.
= Elevation of infarction specific enzymes, Troponins or other specific
biochemical markers.
The following are excluded:
= Non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) with elevation of
Troponin | or T.
= Other acute Coronary Syndromes.
= Any type of angina pectoris

iv) Kidney Failure requiring Regular Dialysis:
End stage renal disease presented as chronic irreversible failure of both kidneys to

function, as a result of which either regular renal dialysis (haemodialysis or peritoneal
dialysis) is instituted or renal transplantation is carried out.
The diagnosis has to be confirmed by a specialist Medical Practitioner

v) Major Organ/ Bone Marrow Transplant:

The actual undergoing of a transplant of:
= One of the following human organs - heart, lung, liver, pancreas, kidney, that
resulted from irreversible end-stage failure of the relevant organ or;
= Human bone marrow using hematopoietic stem cells.

The undergoing of a transplant must be confirmed by specialist medical practitioner.
The following are excluded:

= Other Stem-cell transplants

= Where only islets of Langerhans are transplanted

vi) Multiple Sclerosis with Persisting Symptoms:
The definite occurrence of Multiple Sclerosis. The diagnosis must be supported by all of

the following:
=" Investigation including typical MRI and CSF findings, which unequivocally
confirm the diagnosis to be multiple Sclerosis.
=" There must be current clinical impairment of motor or sensory function, which
must have persisted for a continuous period of at least 6 months.
= Well documented clinical history of exacerbations and remissions of said
symptoms or neurological deficits with at least two clinically documented
episodes at least 1 month apart.
Excluded is:
. Other causes of neurological damage such as SLE and HIV are excluded
vii) Permanent Paralysis of Limbs:
Total and irreversible loss of use of two or more limbs as a result of injury or disease of
the brain or spinal cord. A specialist Medical Practitioner (Physician / Neurologist) must
be of the opinion that paralysis will be permanent with no hope of recovery and must
be present for more than 3 months. .

viii) Stroke resulting in Permanent Symptoms:
Any cerebrovascular incident producing permanent neurological sequelae. This
includes infarction of brain tissue, thrombosis in an intra-cranial vessel, haemorrhage
and embolisation from an extracranial source.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
3|Page

--- Page 4 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

The diagnosis has to be confirmed by a specialist Medical Practitioner and evidenced
by typical clinical symptoms as well as typical findings in CT Scan or MRI of the brain.
Evidence of permanent neurological deficit lasting for atleast 3 months has to be
produced.

The following are excluded:

= Transient ischemic attacks (TIA)

=" Traumatic injury of the brain

= Vascular diseases affecting only the eye or optic nerve or vestibular functions

Def. 11. Day Care centre means any institution established for day care treatment of illness and/or
injuries or a medical setup within a hospital and which has been registered with the local
authorities, wherever applicable, and is under the supervision of a registered and qualified
medical practitioner AND must comply with all minimum criteria as under—

-has qualified nursing staff under its employment;

-has qualified medical practitioner/s in charge;

-has a fully equipped operation theatre of its own where surgical procedures are carried out;
-maintains daily records of patients and will make these accessible to the insurance company’s
authorized personnel

Def. 12. Day Care Procedures means those medical treatment, and/or surgical procedure
i. which is undertaken under General or Local Anaesthesia in a Hospital/day care centre
in less than 24 hours because of technological advancement,
ii. which would have otherwise required a Hospitalisation of more than 24 hours.
Treatment normally taken on an Out-patient basis is not included in the scope of this definition

Def. 13. Deductible means a cost-sharing requirement under a health insurance policy that provides
that the insurer will not be liable for a specified rupee amount in case of indemnity policies and
for a specified number of days/hours in case of hospital cash policies which will apply before
any benefits are payable by the insurer. A deductible does not reduce the Sum Insured.

Def. 14. Dental treatment means a treatment related to teeth or structures supporting teeth
including examinations, filings (where appropriate), crowns, extractions and surgery.

Def. 15. Domiciliary Hospitalisation means medical treatment for an illness/disease/injury which in
the normal course would require a care and treatment at a Hospital but is actually taken while
confined at home under any of the following circumstances:

- The condition of the patient is such that he/she is not in a condition to be removed to a
hospital, or

- The patient takes treatment at home on account of non-availability of a room in a
hospital

Def. 16. Disclosure of information norm means the policy shall be void and all premiums paid hereon
shall be forfeited to the Company, in the event of misrepresentation, mis-description or non-
disclosure of any material fact.

Def. 17. Emergency Care means management for a severe illness or injury which results in symptoms
which occur suddenly and unexpectedly, and requires immediate care by a medical
practitioner to prevent death or serious long term impairment of the insured person’s health.

Def. 18. Grace Period means the specified period of time immediately following the premium due date
during which a payment can be made to renew or continue a Policy in force without loss of
continuity benefits such as waiting periods and coverage of Pre-Existing Diseases. Coverage is
not available for the period for which no premium is received.

Def. 19. Hospital means any institution established for in-patient care and day care treatment of
illness and/or injuries and which has been registered as a hospital with the local authorities

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
4|Page

--- Page 5 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

under the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 or under the

enactments specified under the Schedule of Section 56(1) of the said Act OR complies with all

minimum criteria as under:

= has qualified nursing staff under its employment round the clock,

= has at least 10 in-patient beds, in those towns having a population of less than 10,00,000
and 15 in-patient beds in all other places,

=" has qualified Medical Practitioner(s) in charge round the clock,

= has a fully equipped operation theatre of its own where surgical procedures are carried out,

=~ maintains daily records of patients and will make these accessible to the insurance
company’s authorized personnel.

Def. 20. Hospitalisation or Hospitalised means admission in a Hospital for a minimum of 24
consecutive ‘In-patient Care’ hours except for specified procedures / treatments, where such
admission could be for a period of less than 24 consecutive hours.

Def. 21. Illness means a sickness or a disease or pathological condition leading to the
impairment of normal physiological function which manifests itself during the Policy Period and
requires medical treatment

a) Acute Condition- Acute condition is a disease, illness or injury that is likely to respond quickly to
treatment which aims to return the person to his or her state of health immediately before
suffering the disease/illness/injury which leads to full recovery.

b) Chronic Condition- A chronic condition is defined as disease, illness, or injury that has one or
more o f the following characteristics:

- it needs ongoing or long-term monitoring through consultations, examinations, check-ups, and
/ or tests

—it needs ongoing or long-term control or relief of symptoms

— it requires your rehabilitation or for you to be specially trained to cope with it

—it continues indefinitely

—it recurs or is likely to recur

Def. 22. Injury means accidental physical bodily harm excluding illness or disease solely and directly
caused by external, violent and visible and evident means which is verified and certified by a
Medical Practitioner.

Def. 23. In-patient Care means treatment for which the Insured Person has to stay in a Hospital for
more than 24 hours for a covered event.

Def. 24. Maternity expenses means
i. medical treatment expenses traceable to childbirth (including complicated deliveries
and caesarean sections during hospitalization);
ii. expenses towards lawful medical termination of pregnancy during the Policy Period.

Def. 25. Medical Advise means any consultation or advise from a Medical Practitioner including the
issuance of any prescription or follow up prescription.

Def. 26. Medical Expenses means those expenses that an Insured Person has necessarily and actually
incurred for medical treatment on account of illness or Accident on the advice of a Medical
Practitioner, as long as these are no more than would have been payable if the Insured Person
had not been insured and no more than other Hospitals or doctors in the same locality would
have charged for the same medical treatment.

Def. 27. Medically Necessary means any treatment, test, medication, or stay in Hospital or part of
stay in Hospital which
= Is required for the medical management of the Illness or injury suffered by the Insured
Person;

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
5|Page

--- Page 6 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

= Must not exceed the level of care necessary to provide safe, adequate and appropriate
medical care in scope, duration or intensity.

= Must have been prescribed by a Medical Practitioner.

= Must conform to the professional standards widely accepted in international medical
practice or by the medical community in India.

Def. 28. Medical Practitioner means a person who holds a valid registration from the medical
council of any state or medical council of India or council for Indian medicine or for homeopathy
set up by the government of India or a state government and is thereby entitled to practice
medicine within its jurisdiction; and is acting within the scope and jurisdiction of license.

Def. 29. Migration means the right accorded to individual health insurance policyholders (including
all members under family cover and members of group health insurance policy) to transfer the
credits gained for pre-existing conditions and time-bound exclusions, with the same insurer.

Def. 30. Network Provider means Hospital enlisted by an insurer or a TPA or jointly by an insurer and
a TPA to provide medical services to an insured by a cashless facility.

Def. 31. New Born Baby means baby born during the Policy Period and is aged up to 90 days.

Def. 32. Non Network Provider means any Hospital, day care centre or other provider that is not part
of the Network

Def. 33. Notification of Claim means the process of intimating a claim to the insurer or TPA through
any of the recognized modes of communication.

Def. 34. OPD treatment means the one in which the Insured visits a clinic / hospital or associated
facility like a consultation room for diagnosis and treatment based on the advice of a Medical
Practitioner. The Insured is not admitted as a day care or in-patient

Def. 35. Portability means the right accorded to individual health insurance policyholders (including
all members under family cover) to transfer the credits gained for pre-existing conditions and
time-bound exclusions, from one insurer to another insurer.

Def. 36. Pre-existing Disease means any condition, ailment, injury or disease:
a) That is/are diagnosed by a physician within 48 months prior to the effective date of the
policy issued by the insurer or its reinstatement or
b) For which medical advice or treatment was recommended by, or received from, a
physician within 48 months prior to the effective date of the policy issued by the
insurer or its reinstatement.

Def. 37. Pre- Hospitalisation Medical Expenses means the medical expenses incurred during
predefined number of days preceding the hospitalization of the Insured Person, provided that:
i, Such Medical Expenses are incurred for the same condition for which the Insured
Person’s Hospitalisation was required, and
ii. The In-patient Hospitalization claim for such Hospitalization is admissible by the
Insurance Company

Def. 38. Post-Hospitalisation Medical Expenses means medical expenses incurred during predefined
number of days immediately after the insured person is discharged from the hospital provided
that:

i. Such Medical Expenses are for the same condition for which the insured person’s
hospitalization was required, and

ii. The inpatient hospitalization claim for such hospitalization is admissible by the insurance
company

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
6|Page

--- Page 7 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Def. 39. Qualified Nurse is a person who holds a valid registration from the nursing council of India
or the nursing council of any state in India

Def. 40. Reasonable & Customary Charges means the charges for services or supplies, which are the
standard
charges for a specific provider and consistent with the prevailing charges in the geographical
area for identical or similar services, taking into account the nature of illness/ injury involved.

Def. 41. Room Rent means the amount charged by a hospital towards room and boarding expenses
and shall include associated medical expenses.

Def. 42. Renewal means the terms on which the contract of insurance can be renewed on mutual
consent with a provision of grace period for treating the renewal continuous for the purpose of
gaining credit for pre-existing diseases, time bound exclusions and for all waiting periods.

Def. 43. Surgery or Surgical Procedure means manual and/or operative procedure(s) required for
treatment of an Illness or injury, correction of deformities and defects, diagnosis and cure of
diseases, relief of suffering or prolongation of life, performed in a Hospital or day care centre by
a Medical Practitioner.

Def. 44. Unproven/Experimental treatment means treatment including drug experimental therapy
which is not based on established medical practice in India, is treatment experimental or
unproven.

Def. 45. Intensive Care Unit means an identified section, ward or wing of a Hospital which is under

the constant supervision of a dedicated Medical Practitioner(s), and which is specially equipped
for the continuous monitoring and treatment of patients who are in a critical condition, or
require life support facilities and where the level of care and supervision is considerably more
sophisticated and intensive than in the ordinary and other wards.

Def. 46. ICU (Intensive Care Unit) Charges means the amount charged by a Hospital towards ICU
expenses which shall include the coverage for bed, general medical support services provided to
any ICU patient including monitoring devices, critical care nursing and intensivist charges.

2. Specific Definitions
Def.1. | Adventurous/Hazardous Sports means any sport or activity involving physical exertion and skill

in which an Insured Person participates or competes for entertainment or as part of his
Profession whether he / she is trained or not.

Def.2. Age or Aged means completed years as at the Commencement Date.

Def.3. Alternative treatments means forms of treatments other than treatment "Allopathy" or
"modern medicine" and includes Ayurveda, Unani, Sidha and Homeopathy in the Indian context

Def.4. AYUSH Treatment refers to hospitalisation treatments given under Ayurveda, Yoga and
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy systems.

Def.5. Bank Rate means the rate fixed by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) at the beginning of the
financial year in which claim has fallen due.

Contribution means essentially the right of an insurer to call upon other insurers liable to the
same insured to share the cost of an indemnity claim on a rateable proportion of Sum Insured.
This clause shall not apply to any Benefit offered on fixed benefit basis.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
7|Page

--- Page 8 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Def.6. Commencement Date means the commencement date of this Policy as specified in the
Schedule.

Def. 7. Dependents means only the family members listed below:

i) Your legally married spouse as long as she continues to be married to You;

ii) Your children / Grandchildren Aged between 91 days and 25 years if they are unmarried
and financially dependent with no independent source of income. Children Aged
between 1 to 90 Days can be covered if Newborn Baby Benefit is added by payment of
additional premium subject to policy terms and conditions.

iii) Your natural parents or parents that have legally adopted You, provided that the parent was
below 65 years at his initial participation in the Easy Health Policy,

iv) Your Parent -in-law as long as Your spouse continues to be married to You and were below
65 years at his initial participation in the Easy Health Policy

v) Your Grandparents provided that the grandparent were below 65 years at his initial
participation in the Easy Health Policy,

All Dependent parents, Parent in laws, Grand Parents must be financially dependent on You.

Def. 8. Dependent Child means a child (natural or legally adopted), who is unmarried, Aged between 91
days and 25 years, financially dependent on the primary Insured or Proposer and does not
have his / her independent sources of income. Children Aged between 1 to 90 Days can be
covered if Newborn Baby Benefit is added by payment of additional premium subject to policy
terms and conditions.

Def. 9. Family Floater means a Policy described as such in the Schedule where under You and Your
Dependents named in the Schedule are insured under this Policy as at the Commencement
Date. The Sum Insured for a Family Floater means the sum shown in the Schedule which
represents Our maximum liability for any and all claims made by You and/or all of Your
Dependents during the Policy Year.

Def. 10. Insured Person means You and the persons named in the Schedule.

Def. 11. Material Facts means all relevant information sought by the Company in the Proposal Form
and other connected documents to enable it to take informed decision in the context of
underwriting the risk.

Def. 12. Policy means Your statements in the proposal form (which are the basis of this Policy), this
policy wording (including endorsements, if any), Annexure 1 and the Schedule (as the same may
be amended from time to time).

Def. 13. Policy Period means the period between the Commencement Date and the Expiry Date
specified in the Schedule.

Def. 14. Policy Year means a year following the Commencement Date and its subsequent annual
anniversary.

Def. 15. Shared accommodation means a Hospital room with two or more patient beds.

Def. 16. Single occupancy or any higher accommodation type means a Hospital room with only one
patient bed.

Def. 17. Sum Insured means the sum shown in the Schedule which represents Our maximum

liability for each Insured Person for any and all benefits claimed for during the Policy Year.

Def. 18. TPA means the third party administrator that We appoint from time to time as specified in
the Schedule.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
8|Page

--- Page 9 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Def. 19. We/Our/Us means the HDFC ERGO Genera

Def. 20. You/Your/Policyholder means the person

Policy with Us.

Section B. Benefits

| Insurance Limited.

named in the Schedule who has concluded this

IMPORTANT: Any claims made under these benefits will impact eligibility for Cumulative Bonus, and

Health Checkup.

We will cover the Medical Expenses for:

We will not cover treatment, costs or expenses for*:

*The following exclusions apply in addition to the waiting
periods and general exclusions specified in Section C-1,2,3

In a

ddition to the waiting periods (Section C-1) and

general exclusions (Section C-2&3), We will also not cover
expenses

An insured suffers an Accident or Illness, which

Day care treatment is necessary and is done OR
Domiciliary treatment is necessary and is done

Inpatient Benefits: This section of benefits is applicable when

is covered under this Policy

Hospitalisation is necessary & is done for treatment OR

a. In-Patient Treatment

This includes

Hospital room rent or boarding;
Nursing;

Intensive Care Unit

Medical Practitioners (Fees)
Anesthesia

Blood

Oxygen

Operation theatre

Surgical appliances;

Medicines, drugs & consumables;
Diagnostic procedures.

b. Pre-Hospitalization Medical Expenses for

consultations, investigations and medicines

incurred upto 60 days before the date of
admission to the Hospital (Inpatient or Day

Care or Domiciliary treatment)

c. Post-Hospitalization Medical Expenses for
consultations, investigations and
medicines incurred upto 90 days after
discharge from Hospitalisation (Inpatient
or Day Care or Domiciliary treatment).

d. Day Care Procedures

Medical treatment or surgical procedure

which is undertaken under general or local

anaesthesia, which require admission in a

If as per any or all of the Medical references herein
below containing guidelines and protocols for
Evidence Based Medicines, the Hospitalisation for
treatment under claim is not necessary or the stay
at the hospital is found unduly long:

Medical text books,
Standard treatment guidelines as stated in
clinical establishment act of Government of

India,

e World Health Organisation (WHO)
protocols,

e Published guidelines by healthcare
providers,

Guidelines set by medical societies like
cardiological society of India, neurological
society of India etc.

Claims which have NOT been admitted under 1a), 1d)
and 1e)

Expenses not related to the admission and not
incidental to the treatment for which the admission
has taken place

Treatment that can be and is usually taken on an Out-
Patient basis is not covered
Treatment a NOT taken at a Hospital

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under

license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

9|Page

--- Page 10 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Hospital/Day Care Centre for stay less than
24 hours. Treatment normally taken on out-
patient basis is not included in the scope of
this definition.

2)

e. Domiciliary Treatment 1. Treatment of less than 3 days (Coverage will be
Medical treatment for an provided for expenses incurred in first three days
\IIness/disease/injury which in the normal only if treatment period is greater than 3 days)

course would require care and treatment at a

Hospital but is actually taken while confined

at home under any of the _ following

circumstances:

1. The condition of the Patient is such that

he/she is not in a condition to be removed
to a Hospital or,

2. The Patient takes treatment at home on

account of non availability of room ina
Hospital.

Pre and Post Hospitalisation expenses for

consultations, investigations and medicines

incurred upto 60 days before hospitalisation

and 90 days after hospitalization respectively

will be covered in case of domiciliary

treatment.

f. Organ Donor: 1. Claims which have NOT been admitted under 1a) for
Medical and surgical expenses of the insured member.
organ donor for harvesting the organ | 2. Admission not compliant under the Transplantation
where an Insured Person is the recipient. of Human Organs Act, 1994 (as amended).

3. The organ donor’s Pre and Post-Hospitalisation
IMPORTANT: Expenses incurred by an expenses.
insured person while donating an organ is
NOT covered.

g. Ambulance: 1. Claims which have NOT been admitted under 1a) and
Expenses incurred on a transportation of 1d)

Insured Person to a_ Hospital for | 2. Healthcare or ambulance service provider not
treatment in case of an emergency, registered with road traffic authority.
subject to Rs. 2000 per Hospitalisation.

h. Ayush Benefit 1. Claims which have not been admitted under 1a)
Expenses incurred on treatment taken | 2. Hospitalisation for evaluation, Investigation only
under Ayurveda, Unani, Sidha and | 3. Treatment availed outside India
Homeopathy in a government hospital or | 4. Treatment at a healthcare facility which is NOT a
in any institute recognized by government Hospital.
and/or accredited by Quality Council of
India/National Accreditation Board on
Health subject to amounts specified in
the Schedule of Benefits

i. Daily Cash for choosing shared | 1. Daily Cash Benefit for time spent by the Insured
Accommodation Person in an intensive care unit
Daily cash amount will be payable per day | 2. Claims which have NOT been admitted under

as mentioned in schedule of Benefits if
the Insured Person is Hospitalised in
Shared Accommodation in a Network
Hospital for each continuous and
completed period of 24 hours if the
Hospitalisation exceeds 48 hours.

la).

Additional Benefits: The following benefits are available to all Insured Persons during the Policy Period.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under

license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

10|Page

--- Page 11 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Any claims made under these benefits will be subject to In-patient Sum Insured and will impact eligibility
for a Cumulative Bonus and Health Checkup These benefits are applicable based on the plan variant

selected, as mentioned in the schedule of benefits.

Daily Cash for Accompanying an Insured
Child

If the Insured Person Hospitalised is a
child Aged 12 years or less, daily cash
amount will be payable as mentioned in
schedule of Benefits for 1 accompanying
adult for each complete period of 24
hours if Hospitalisation exceeds 72
hours.

Newborn baby

Medical Expenses for any medically
necessary treatment described at 1)a)
while the Insured Person (the Newborn
baby) is Hospitalised during the Policy
Period as an inpatient provided a
proposal form is submitted for the
insurance of the newborn baby within 90
days after the birth, and We have
accepted the same and received the
premium sought.

Under this benefit, Coverage for
newborn baby will incept from the date,
the premium has been received.

The coverage is subject to the policy
exclusions, terms and conditions.

This Benefit is applicable if Maternity
benefit is opted and We have accepted
a maternity claim under this Policy.

Recovery Benefit

Lumpsum amount will be payable as
mentioned in schedule of Benefits if the
Insured Person is Hospitalised as an
inpatient beyond 10 consecutive and
continuous days

This benefit is payable only once per
\IIness/Accident per Policy Year.

Daily Cash Benefit for days of admission and
discharge
Claims which have NOT been admitted under 1a).

Claims which have NOT been admitted under 3a) i.e.
Maternity Expenses

Claims other than those available in Section B-1,
Section C-1,2,3

Claims which have NOT been admitted under 1a).

Emergency Air Ambulance Cover

We will pay for ambulance
transportation in  an_ airplane’ or
helicopter subject to maximum limit
prescribed in d(i) , for emergency life
threatening health conditions which
require immediate and rapid ambulance
transportation to the hospital/medical
centre that ground transportation
cannot provide subject to:

e Necessary medical treatment not

Claims which have NOT been admitted under
Inpatient Treatment or Day Care Procedures.
Expenses incurred in return transportation to the
insured’s home by air ambulance is excluded.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under

license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

11|Page

--- Page 12 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

being available at the location where the
Insured Person is situated at the time of
Emergency;

e The Medical Evacuation been
prescribed by a Medical Practitioner and
is Medically Necessary;

e The insured person is in India and
the treatment is required in India only
and not overseas in any _ condition
whatsoever; and

e The air ambulance provider being
registered in India.

d(i)The amount payable in case of Air
ambulance facility shall be either the
actual expenses or Rs. 2.5 Lacs per
hospitalization, whichever is lower; upto
basic sum insured limit for a year

3. Additional Benefit not related to Sum Insured: The following benefit is available to all Insured Persons
during the Policy Period. Any claims made under these benefits will not be subject to In-patient Sum Insured
and will not impact eligibility for a Cumulative Bonus and Health Checkup. These benefits are applicable based
on the plan variant selected, as mentioned in the schedule of benefits.

a. Maternity Expenses 1. Pre- and post-hospitalisation expenses under 1-b)
i. Medical Expenses for a_ delivery and 1-c)
(including caesarean section) as | 2. Ectopic pregnancy under this benefit (although it
mentioned in schedule of Benefits shall be covered under 1a)
while Hospitalised or the lawful medical | 3. Claim for Dependents other than Insured Person’s
termination of pregnancy during the spouse under this Policy.

Policy Period limited to 2 deliveries or
terminations or either during the
lifetime of the Insured Person

ii. Medical Expenses for pre-natal and
post-natal expenses per delivery or
termination upto the amount stated in
the Schedule of Benefits,

iii. Medical Expenses incurred for the
medically necessary treatment of the
new born baby upto the amount stated
in the Schedule of Benefits unless the
new born baby is covered under 2b),
and

iv. The Insured Person must have been an
Insured Person under Our Policy for the
period of time specified in the Schedule
of Benefits.

4. Critical IIIness (Optional benefit)

Any claims made under this benefit will not be subject to In-patient Sum Insured and will not impact eligibility
for a Cumulative Bonus and Health Checkup. This benefit is optional and effective only if mentioned in the
Schedule.

4| a. Critical IIIness (Optional benefit) 1. The Insured Person is first diagnosed as suffering
We will pay the Critical Illness Sum from a Critical Illness within 90 days of the

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &

Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400

020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

12|Page

--- Page 13 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Insured as a lump sum in addition to Our commencement of the Policy Period and the Insured
payment under 1)a), provided that: Person has not previously been insured continuously
and without interruption under an Easy Health Policy.
i. The Insured Person is first diagnosed as | 2. The Insured Person has already made a claim for the

suffering from a Critical Illness during same Critical Illness.

the Policy Period, and 3. A claim for this benefit has already been made 3
il. The Insured Person survives for at least times under this Policy or any other Easy Health

30 days following such diagnosis. policy issued by Us.

iii. “Critical Illness” includes Cancer, Open
Chest CABG, First Heart Attack, Kidney
Failure, Major Organ/Bone Marrow
Transplant, Multiple Sclerosis,
Permanent Paralysis of Limbs and
Stroke.

Note: Critical Illness (Optional benefit)
is always provided on an individual Sum
Insured basis irrespective of whether
policy is issued on an individual or
floater sum inured basis.

5. Renewal Benefits:

5.1. Cumulative Bonus

a) A 10% cumulative bonus will be applied on the Sum Insured for next policy year under the Policy after
every CLAIM FREE Policy Year, provided that the Policy is renewed with Us and without a break. The maximum
cumulative bonus shall not exceed 100% of the Sum Insured in any Policy Year.

b) In relation to a Family Floater, the cumulative bonus so applied will only be available in respect of
claims made by those Insured Persons who were Insured Persons in the claim free Policy Year and continue to be
Insured Persons in the subsequent Policy Year.

c) If a cumulative bonus has been applied and a claim is made, then in the subsequent Policy Year We will
automatically decrease the cumulative bonus by 10% of the Sum Insured in that following Policy Year. There will

be no impact on the Inpatient Sum Insured, only the accrued cumulative bonus will be decreased.

d) If the Insured Persons in the expiring policy are covered on individual basis and thus have accumulated
the no claim bonus for each member in the expiring policy, and such expiring policy is renewed with Us on a
Family Floater basis, then the no claim bonus to be carried forward for credit in the Policy would be the least no
claim bonus amongst all the Insured Persons.

e) Portability/migration benefit will be offered to the extent of sum of previous sum insured and accrued
cumulative bonus (if opted for), portability/migration benefit shall not apply to any other additional increased
sum insured.

f) In policies with a two year Policy Period, the application of above guidelines of Cumulative Bonus shall
be post completion of each policy year.

5.2. Stay Active

We will offer a discount at each renewal if the insured member achieves the average step count target
on the mobile application provided by Us in the specified time interval (calculated from the policy risk

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
13|Page

--- Page 14 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

start date) as per the grid below. In an individual policy, the average step count would be calculated per
adult member and in a floater policy it would be an average of all adult members covered. Dependent
children covered either in individual or floater plan will not be considered for calculation of average
steps.

This discount will be accrued at defined time intervals as given in table below. The discount will be
cumulated and offered as discount on the renewal premium.

In individual policies the discount percentage (%) would be applied on premium applicable per insured
member (Dependent Children are not eligible for this stay active discount in an individual policy) and ina
floater policy it would be applied on premium applicable on policy.

The discount grid would be as per the table below:

1 Year Policy
Time Interval (calculated from policy risk start date)
Average Step Risk start date or date 91-180 days 181-270 days 271-300 Maximum Discount
Target of download of mobile days at the end of the year
application -90 days
5000 or below 0%
5001 to 8000 2%
8001 to 10000 1.25% 1.25% 1.25% 1.25% 5%
Above 10000 2% 2% 2% 2% 8%
2 Year Policy

Time Interval ((calculated from policy risk start date)
Risk start 91-180 181-270 | 271-360 | 361-450 | 451-540 | 541-630 | 631-660 | Maximum

Average date or days days days days days days days Discount
Step date of at the
target download end of 2

of mobile years

application

-90 days
3000 or 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%
below
5001 to °
8000 2%

8001 to 3
10000 9%

Above 9 9 9 9 9 9 ° 5 5

The mobile app must be downloaded within 30 days of the policy risk start date to avail this
benefit. The average step count completed by an Insured member would be tracked on this
mobile application.

We reserve the right to remove or reduce any count of steps if found to be achieved in unfair
manner by manipulation.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

14|Page

--- Page 15 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Illustration

Policy start date 1st Jan 2016
Policy Tenure

Time Interval
Risk start date or
date of download of
mobile application -
90 days 91 days-180 days | 181 days-270 days 271- 300 days

average steps taken in
the defined time period 8500 10000 5001 7500

discount %applicable 1.25% 1.25%

Total discount applicable on renewal premium = 3.5%

5.3. Preventive Health Check-up

a) If You have maintained an Easy Health Policy with Us for the period of time mentioned in the
Schedule of Benefits without any break, then at the end of each block of continuous years (as
mentioned in the Schedule of benefits) We will pay upto the percentage (mentioned in the
Schedule of Benefits) of the Sum Insured for this Policy Year or the subsequent Policy Years
(whichever is lower) towards the cost of a preventive health check-up for those Insured Persons
who were insured for the number of previous Policy Years mentioned in the Schedule.
Note: If member has changed the plan in subsequent year and in the new plan the waiting
period is less than previous plan then waiting period mentioned in the current plan would be
applicable.

Standard Exclusive

Easy Health Individual Upto 1% of Sum Insured per | Upto 1% of Sum Insured subject to a
Insured Person upto Rs.5000, only | Maximum of Rs.5,000 per Insured Person,
once at the end of a block of every | only once at the end of a block of every
continuous four claim free years. continuous three policy years

Easy Health Family Upto 1% of Sum Insured per Policy | Upto 1% of Sum Insured per Policy subject
upto Rs.5000, only once at the end | to a Maximum of Rs. 5,000 per Policy, only
of a block of every continuous four | once at the end of a block of every
claim free years continuous three policy years

b) In case of family floater in Standard Variant, if any of the members have made a claim under
this Policy, the health check-up benefit will not be offered to the whole family.
c) Wewill consider complete policy years for the eligibility of this benefit.

Preventive Health Check-up means a package of medical test(s) undertaken for general assessment of
health status, it does not include any diagnostic or investigative medical tests for evaluation of illness or a
disease.

Section C. Exclusions & Waiting Period

1. Standard Waiting Period
All Illnesses and treatments shall be covered subject to the waiting periods specified below:

i. 30-day waiting period — Code — Excl03

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
15|Page

--- Page 16 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

a) Expenses related to the treatment of any illness within 30 days from the first policy
commencement date shall be excluded except claims arising due to an accident, provided
the same are covered.

b) This exclusion shall not, however, apply if the insured person has continuous coverage for
more than twelve months.

c) The within referred waiting period is made applicable to the enhanced sum insured in the
event of granting higher sum insured subsequently.

ii. Specified disease/procedure waiting period — Code — Excl02

a) Expenses related to the treatment of the listed Conditions, surgeries/treatments shall be
excluded until the expiry of 24 months of continuous coverage after the date of inception
of the first policy with us. This exclusion shall not be applicable for claims arising due to an
accident or underlying cause is cancer(s).

b) In case of enhancement of sum insured the exclusion shall apply afresh to the extent of
sum insured increase.

c) If any of the specified disease/procedure falls under the waiting period specified for pre-
existing diseases, then the longer of the two waiting periods shall apply.

d) The waiting period for listed conditions shall apply even if contracted after the policy or
declared and accepted without a specific exclusion.

e) If the Insured Person is continuously covered without any break as defined under the
applicable norms on portability/migration stipulated by IRDAI, then waiting period for the
same would be reduced to the extent of prior coverage.

f) List of specific diseases/procedures: -

Surgeries/ procedure (irrespective of
any illness / diagnosis other than
cancers)

e Adenoidectomy

e Mastoidectomy

© Tonsillectomy

e Tympanoplasty

e Surgery for nasal septum deviation

e Nasal concha resection

e Nasal polypectomy

e Surgery for Turbinate hypertrophy

IIIness/Diagnosis (irrespective of
treatments medical or surgical)

Sinusitis
Rhinitis
Tonsillitis

° Cysts, polyps including
breast lumps

Gynaecological ° Polycystic ovarian
disease

Hysterectomy

Fibroids (fibromyoma)

Non infective arthritis e Surgery for prolapsed inter vertebral
Gout and Rheumatism Bery P P

Orthopaedic disk

Osteoarthritis and . .
. e Joint replacement surgeries
Osteoporosis

° Calculus diseases of
gall bladder including
Cholecystitis

° Pancreatitis

Gastrointestinal e Fissure/fistula in anus,

hemorrhoids, pilonidal sinus

° Ulcer and erosion of
stomach and duodenum

° Gastro Esophageal

Cholecystectomy
Surgery of hernia

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
16|Page

--- Page 17 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Reflux Disorder (GERD)
° All forms of cirrhosis
(Please Note: All forms of

cirrhosis due to alcohol will be

excluded)
° Perineal Abscesses
Perianal Abscesses

° Calculus diseases of
Urogenital system Example:
. . e Surgery on prostate
. Kidney stone, Urinary bladder
e. Urogenital an ° Surgery for Hydrocele/
- . Rectocele
e Benign Hyperplasia of
prostate

e Cataract

° NIL |

g Others e e Surgery of varicose veins and
: varicose ulcers

General

( Applicable to all

organ e Internal tumours,
h. systems/organs/ cysts, nodules, polyps, skin e NIL
disciplines tumours
whether or not

described above)

iii. Pre-Existing Diseases — Code — Excl01

a) Expenses related to the treatment of a pre-existing disease (PED) and its direct
complications shall be excluded until the expiry of 36 months of continuous coverage after
the date of inception of the first policy with insurer.

b) In case of enhancement of sum insured the exclusion shall apply afresh to the extent of
sum insured increase.

c) If the insured person is continuously covered without any break as defined under the
portability/migration norms of the extant IRDAI (Health Insurance) Regulations, then
waiting period for the same would be reduced to the extent of prior coverage.

d) Coverage under the policy after the expiry of 36 months for any pre-existing disease is
subject to the same being declared at the time of application and accepted by insurer.

2. Standard General exclusions

We will not pay for any claim which is caused by, arising from or attributable to:
Non Medical Exclusions 1) Breach of law: Code — Excl10
Expenses for treatment directly arising from or consequent upon any
Insured Person committing or attempting to commit a breach of law
with criminal intent.
2) Hazardous or Adventure sports: Code — Excl09
Expenses related to any treatment necessitated due to participation
as a professional in hazardous or adventure sports, including but not
limited to, para-jumping, rock climbing, mountaineering, rafting,
motor racing, horse racing or scuba diving, hand gliding, sky diving,
deep-sea diving.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
17|Page

--- Page 18 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Medical Exclusions

3) Treatment for Alcoholism, drug or substance abuse or any addictive
condition and consequences thereof. Code — Excl12

4) Obesity/ Weight Control: Code — Excl06
Expenses related to the surgical treatment of obesity that does not
fulfil all the below conditions:

i. Surgery to be conducted is upon the advice of the Doctor

ii. The surgery/Procedure conducted should be supported by
clinical protocols
iii. The member has to be 18 years of age or older and
iv. Body Mass Index (BMI);
a) greater than or equal to 40 or
b) greater than or equal to 35 in conjunction with any of the
following severe co-morbidities following failure of less
invasive methods of weight loss:
i. Obesity-related cardiomyopathy
ii. Coronary heart disease
iii. Severe Sleep Apnoea
iv. Uncontrolled Type2 Diabetes

5) Expenses related to the treatment for correction of eye sight due to
refractive error less than 7.5 dioptres: Code — Excl15

6) Cosmetic or plastic Surgery: Code- Excl08
Expenses for cosmetic or plastic surgery or any treatment to change
appearance unless for reconstruction following an Accident, Burn(s)
or Cancer or as part of medically necessary treatment to remove a
direct and immediate health risk to the insured. For this to be
considered a medical necessity, it must be certified by the attending
Medical Practitioner.

7) Change-of-Gender treatments: Code — Excl07
Expenses related to any treatment, including surgical management,
to change characteristics of the body to those of the opposite sex.

8) Unproven Treatments:

Expenses related to any unproven treatment, services and supplies
for or in connection with any treatment. Unproven treatments are
treatments, procedures or supplies that lack significant medical
documentation to support their effectiveness. Code — Excl16

9) Investigation & Evaluation: Code — Excl04
a) Expenses related to any admission primarily for diagnostics and

evaluation purposes only are excluded.

b) Any diagnostic expenses which are not related or not incidental
to the current diagnosis and treatment are excluded.

10) Rest Cure, rehabilitation and respite care: Code — Excl05
a) Expenses related to any admission primarily for enforced bed rest

and not for receiving treatment. This also includes:

i. Custodial care either at home or in a nursing facility for
personal care such as help with activities of daily living such as
bathing, dressing, moving around either by skilled nurses or
assistant or non-skilled persons.

ii. Any services for people who are terminally ill to address
physical, social, emotional and spiritual needs.

11) Treatments received in heath hydros, nature cure clinics, spas
or similar establishments or private beds registered as a nursing
home attached to such establishments or where admission is
arranged wholly or partly for domestic reasons. Code — Excl13

12) Dietary supplements and substances that can be purchased

without prescription, including but not limited to Vitamins, minerals

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
18|Page

--- Page 19 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

and organic substances unless prescribed by a medical practitioner
as part of hospitalization claim or day care procedure. Code — Excl14
13) Maternity( except to the extent provided for under Section
B.1.3.a)):Code — Excl18
i. Medical treatment expenses traceable to childbirth (including
complicated deliveries and caesarean sections incurred during
hospitalization) except ectopic pregnancy;
ii. Expenses towards miscarriage (unless due to an accident) and
lawful medical termination of pregnancy during the policy period.
14) Sterility and Infertility: Code — Excl17
Expenses related to sterility and infertility. This includes:
i. Any type of contraception, sterilization
ii. Assisted Reproduction services including artificial insemination
and advanced reproductive technologies such as IVF, ZIFT, GIFT,
ICSI
iii. Gestational Surrogacy
iv. Reversal of sterilization
15) Excluded Providers: Code — Excl11
Expenses incurred towards treatment in any hospital or by any
Medical Practitioner or any other provider specifically excluded by
the Insurer and disclosed in its website / notified to the
policyholders are not admissible. However, in case of life
threatening situations or following an accident, expenses up to the
stage of stabilization are payable but not the complete claim.

3. Specific Exclusions

Non Medical Exclusions 1) Treatment arising from or consequent upon war or any act of
war, invasion, act of foreign enemy, (whether war be declared
or not or caused during service in the armed forces of any
country), civil war, public defence, rebellion, revolution,
insurrection, military or usurped acts, nuclear
weapons/materials, chemical and_ biological weapons,
radiation of any kind.

2) Intentional self injury or attempted suicide while sane or
insane.

3) Any Insured Person’s participation or involvement in naval,
military or air force operation.

Medical Exclusions 4) Prosthetic and other devices which are self-detachable/removable
without surgery involving anaesthesia

5) Treatment availed outside India.

6) Treatment at a healthcare facility that is not a Hospital

7) Circumcisions (unless necessitated by Illness or injury and forming
part of treatment)

8) Non allopathic treatment except to the extent provided for under
Section B.1.1.h).

9) Conditions for which treatment could have been done on an
outpatient basis without any Hospitalization.

10) Preventive care, vaccination including inoculation and
immunisations (except in case of post-bite treatment)
11) Provision or fitting of hearing aids, spectacles or contact lenses

including optometric therapy, any treatment and associated
expenses for alopecia, baldness, wigs, or toupees, medical supplies
including elastic stockings, diabetic test strips

Sleep apnoea.

12)

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
19|Page

--- Page 20 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

13) Congenital external diseases, defects or anomalies

14) Expenses incurred by the insured on organ donation

15) Treatment and supplies for analysis and adjustments of spinal
subluxation, diagnosis and treatment by manipulation of the skeletal
structure; muscle stimulation by any means except treatment of
fractures (excluding hairline fractures) and dislocations of the
mandible and extremities.

16) Dental treatment and surgery of any kind, unless requiring
Hospitalisation

17) Any non medical expenses mentioned in List 1 of Annexure |

18) Treatment rendered by a Medical Practitioner which is outside
his discipline or the discipline for which he is licensed.

19) Treatments rendered by a Medical Practitioner who is a

member of the Insured Person’s family or stays with him, however
proven material costs are eligible for reimbursement in accordance
with the applicable cover.

20) Any treatment or part of a treatment that is not of a
reasonable charge and not Medically Necessary.

21) Drugs or treatments which are not supported by a
prescription.

22) Any specific time bound or lifetime exclusion(s) applied by Us
and specified in the Schedule and accepted by the insured.

23) Admission for administration of Intra-articular or Intra-lesional

injections, Supplementary medications like Zolendronic acid (Trade
name Zometa, Reclast, etc.) or IV immunoglobulin infusion

Section D. General Conditions
1. Standard General Conditions

a. Conditions Precedent to admissibility of Liability
The terms and conditions of the Policy must be fulfilled by the Insured Person for the Company
to make any payment for claim(s) arising under the Policy.

b. Claims Settlement (Provision for Penal Interest)

i) The Company shall settle or reject a claim, as the case may be, within 30 days from the
date of receipt of last necessary document.

ii) In the case of delay in the payment of a claim, the Company shall be liable to pay interest
to the Policyholder from the date of receipt of last necessary document to the date of
payment of claim at a rate 2% above the Bank Rate.

iii) However, where the circumstances of a claim warrant an investigation in the opinion of
the Company, it shall initiate and complete such investigation at the earliest, in any case
not later than 30 days from the date of receipt of last necessary document. In such cases,
the Company shall settle or reject the claim within 45 days from the date of receipt of last
necessary document.

iv) In case of delay beyond stipulated 45 days, the Company shall be liable to pay interest to
the Policyholder at a rate 2% above the Bank Rate from the date of receipt of last
necessary document to the date of payment of claim.

v) We shall be under no obligation to make any payment under this Policy unless We have
received all premium payments in full in time and all payments have been realised and We
have been provided with the documentation and information We has requested to

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
20|Page

--- Page 21 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

establish the circumstances of the claim, its quantum or Our liability for it, and unless the
Insured Person has complied with his obligations under this Policy.

vi) We will only make payment to You under this Policy. Receipt of payment by You shall be
considered as a complete discharge of Our liability against any claim under this Policy. In the
event of Your death, We will make payment to the Nominee (as named in the Schedule).

vii) The assignment of benefits of the policy shall be subject to applicable law.

viii) Cashless service: If any treatment, consultation or procedure for which a claim may be
made is to be taken at a Network Hospital, then We will provide a cashless service by
making payment to the extent of Our liability direct to the Network Hospital as long as We
are given notice that the Insured Person wishes to take advantage of a cashless service
accompanied by full particulars at least 48 hours before any planned treatment or
Hospitalisation or within 24 hours after the treatment or Hospitalisation in the case of an
emergency.

ix) Healthcare Advisory Benefit: We may suggest alternate Network Provider in specific cases
of surgical or medical treatment, should the Insured member accept and utilize one of the
alternatives suggested he would be eligible for a lump sum benefit of Rs 5000.

Please note: The acceptance of our recommendation is not obligatory on the Insured
member and We are not liable for any outcome of the treatment conducted at the network
centre.

c. Fraud
If any claim made by the Insured Person, is in any respect fraudulent, or if any false statement,
or declaration is made or used in support thereof, or if any fraudulent means or devices are
used by the Insured Person or anyone acting on his/her behalf to obtain any benefit under this
Policy, all benefits under this policy and the premium paid shall be forfeited.

Any amount already paid against claims made under this Policy but which are found fraudulent
later shall be repaid by all recipient(s)/policyholder(s), who have made that particular claim,
who shall be jointly and severally liable for such repayment to the Insurer.

For the purpose of this clause, the expression "fraud" means any of the following acts committed
by the Insured Person or by his agent or the hospital/doctor/any other party acting on behalf of
the Insured Person, with intent to deceive the insurer or to induce the insurer to issue an
insurance policy:

a) the suggestion, as a fact of that which is not true and which the Insured
Person does not believe to be true;

b) the active concealment of a fact by the Insured Person having knowledge or
belief of the fact;

c) any other act fitted to deceive; and

d) any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be fraudulent

The Company shall not repudiate the claim and / or forfeit the Policy benefits on the ground of
Fraud, if the Insured Person / beneficiary can prove that the misstatement was true to the best
of his knowledge and there was no deliberate intention to suppress the fact or that such
misstatement of or suppression of material fact are within the knowledge of the Insurer.

d. Multiple Policies

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
21|Page

--- Page 22 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

i.ln case of multiple policies taken by an Insured Person during a period from one or more
insurers to indemnify treatment costs, the Insured Person shall have the right to require a
settlement of his/her claim in terms of any of his/her policies. In all such cases the Insurer
chosen by the Insured Person shall be obliged to settle the claim as long as the claim is within
the limits of and according to the terms of the chosen Policy.

ii.Insured Person having multiple policies shall also have the right to prefer claims under this
Policy for the amounts disallowed under any other policy / policies even if the Sum Insured is
not exhausted. Then the insurer shall independently settle the claim subject to the terms and
conditions of this Policy.

iii. lf the amount to be claimed exceeds the Sum Insured under a single Policy, the Insured Person
shall have the right to choose Insurer from whom he/she wants to claim the balance amount.

iv.Where an Insured Person has policies from more than one Insurer to cover the same risk on
indemnity basis, the Insured Person shall only be indemnified the treatment costs in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the chosen Policy.

e. Renewal of Policy
The policy shall ordinarily be renewable except on grounds of fraud, misrepresentation by the
insured person.

i. The Company shall endeavor to give notice for Renewal. However, the Company is not
under obligation to give any notice for Renewal.

ii. Renewal shall not be denied on the ground that the Insured Person had made a claim or
claims in the preceding policy years.

iii. Request for Renewal along with requisite premium shall be received by the Company before
the end of the policy period.

iv. At the end of the policy period, the Policy shall terminate and can be renewed within the
Grace Period to maintain continuity of benefits without Break in Policy. Coverage is not
available during the Grace Period.

v. No loading shall apply on renewals based on individual claims experience.

f. Cancellation
i) The Policyholder may cancel this policy by giving 15days’ written notice and in such an
event, the Company shall refund premium for the unexpired policy period as detailed

below.

1 Year Policy Period 2 Year Policy Period
Length of time Policy in| % of premium | Length of time Policy in| % of premium
force refunded force refunded
Upto 1 Month 75.00% Upto 1 Month 87.50%

Upto 3 Months 50.00% Upto 3 Months 75.00%
Upto 6 Months 25.00% Upto 6 Months 62.50%
Exceeding 6 Months Nil Upto 12 Months 48.00%

Upto 15 Months 25.00%
Upto 18 Months 12.00%

Exceeding 18 Months Nil

For Policies where premium is paid by instalment, the following additional conditions will be applicable:
i. Where yearly payment option is in force under the Policy, cancellation grid as per 1-Year Tenure
policies will be applicable.
ii.For all other payment options, 50% of current instalment premium will be refunded when the
current period elapsed is less than 6 months from the commencement of the Policy Year. For
instalment after 6 months, no refund will be payable.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
22|Page

--- Page 23 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

iii. In case of admissible claim under the Policy, future instalment for the current Policy Year will
be adjusted in the claim amount and no refund of any premium will be applicable during the
Policy Year.

Notwithstanding anything contained herein or otherwise, no refunds of premium shall be
made in respect of Cancellation where, any claim has been admitted or has been lodged or
any benefit has been availed by the Insured Person under the Policy.

ii) The Company may cancel the policy at any time on grounds of misrepresentation non-
disclosure of material facts, fraud by the insured person by giving 15 days’ written notice.
There would be no refund of premium on cancellation on grounds of misrepresentation,
non-disclosure of material facts or fraud.

g. Free Look Period
The Free Look Period shall be applicable on new individual health insurance policies and not on
renewals or at the time of porting/migrating the Policy.

The Insured Person shall be allowed free look period of fifteen days from date of receipt of the
policy document to review the terms and conditions of the policy, and to return the same if not
acceptable.

If the Insured has not made any claim during the Free Look Period, the insured shall be entitled
to

i. a refund of the premium paid less any expenses incurred by the Company on medical
examination of the Insured Person and the stamp duty charges or

ii. where the risk has already commenced and the option of return of the Policy is exercised by
the Insured Person, a deduction towards the proportionate risk premium for period of cover
or

iii. Where only a part of the insurance coverage has commenced, such proportionate premium
commensurate with the insurance coverage during such period.

h. Disclosure of Information

The policy shall be void and all premium paid thereon shall be forfeited to the Company in the
event of misrepresentation, mis description or non-disclosure of any material fact by the
policyholder.

i. Complete Discharge

Any payment to the Policyholder, Insured Person or his/ her nominees or his/ her legal
representative or assignee or to the Hospital, as the case may be, for any benefit under the
Policy shall be a valid discharge towards payment of claim by the Company to the extent of that
amount for the particular claim.

j. Moratorium Period

After completion of eight continuous years under the policy, no look back to be applied. This period
of eight years is called as Moratorium Period. The moratorium would be applicable for the sums
insured of the first policy and subsequently completion of 8 continuous years would be applicable
from date of enhancement of sums insured only on the enhanced limits. After the expiry of
Moratorium Period no health insurance claim shall be contestable except for proven fraud and
permanent exclusions specified in the policy contract. The policies would however be subject to all
limits, sub limits, co-payments, deductibles as per the policy contract

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
23|Page

--- Page 24 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

k. Portability

The Insured Person will have the option to port the Policy to other insurers by applying to such
Insurer to port the entire policy along with all the members of the family, if any, at least 45 days
before, but not earlier than 60 days from the policy renewal date as per IRDAI guidelines related
to Portability. If such person is presently covered and has been continuously covered without
any lapses under any health insurance policy with an Indian General/Health insurer, the
proposed Insured Person will get the accrued continuity benefits in waiting periods as per IRDAI
guidelines on portability.

For Detailed Guidelines on Portability, kindly refer the link
https://www.irdai.gov.in/ADMINCMS/cms/frmGuidelines_Layout.aspx?page=PageNo3987

Il. Migration
The Insured Person will have the option to migrate the Policy to other health insurance
products/plans offered by the Company by applying for Migration of the policyatleast30 days
before the policy renewal date as per IRDAI guidelines on Migration. If such person is presently
covered and has been continuously covered without any lapses under any health insurance
product/plan offered by the Company, the Insured Person will get the accrued continuity
benefits in waiting periods as per IRDAI guidelines on Migration.

For Detailed Guidelines on Migration, kindly refer the link

https://www. irdai.gov.in/ADMINCMS/cms/frmGuidelines_Layout.aspx?page=PageNo3987
m. Possibility of Revision of terms of the Policy including the Premium Rates

The Company, with prior approval of IRDAI, may revise or modify the terms of the Policy
including the premium rates. The Insured Person shall be notified three months before the
changes are effected.

n. Withdrawal of Policy

i. In the likelihood of this product being withdrawn in future, the Company will intimate the
Insured Person about the same 90 days prior to expiry of the policy.

ii. Insured Person will have the option to migrate to similar health insurance product
available with the Company at the time of renewal with all the accrued continuity benefits
such as Cumulative Bonus, waiver of waiting period as per IRDAI guidelines, provided the
policy has been maintained without a break.

o. Nomination:
The Policyholder is required at the inception of the Policy to make a nomination for the purpose of
payment of claims under the Policy in the event of death of the Policyholder. Any change of nomination
shall be communicated to the Company in writing and such change shall be effective only when an
endorsement on the Policy is made. In the event of death of the Policyholder, the Company will pay the
nominee {as named in the Policy Schedule/Policy Certificate/Endorsement (if any)} and in case there is
no subsisting nominee, to the legal heirs or legal representatives of the Policyholder whose discharge
shall be treated as full and final discharge of its liability under the Policy.

p. Premium Payment in Instalments

If the Insured Person has opted for payment of Premium on an installment basis i.e. Half Yearly,
Quarterly or Monthly, as mentioned in the Policy Schedule, the following Conditions shall apply
(notwithstanding any terms contrary elsewhere in the Policy):

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
24|Page

--- Page 25 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

i. Grace Period as mentioned in the table below would be given to pay the installment premium due
for the Policy

Options Instalment Premium Option Grace Period applicable
Option 1 Multi-Year / Yearly 30 days
Option 2 Half Yearly 30 days
Option 3 Quarterly 30 days
Option 4 Monthly 15 Days

ii. During such Grace Period, coverage will not be available from the due date of installment premium
till the date of receipt of premium by Company

iii. The Insured Person will get the accrued continuity benefit in respect of the “Waiting Periods”,
“Specific Waiting Periods” in the event of payment of premium within the stipulated Grace Period

iv. No interest will be charged If the installment premium is not paid on due date

v. In case of installment premium due not received within the Grace Period, the Policy will get
cancelled

vi. In the event of a claim, all subsequent premium installments shall immediately become due and
payable

vii. The Company has the right to recover and deduct all the pending installments from the claim

amount due under the Policy.

Instalment premium payment through Auto Debit/ECS Facility

i. If Option of Premium payment by instalment is opted through auto Debit/ECS facility, Electronic

Clearing Service (ECS) Mandate form needs to be completely filled & signed by the Insured Person.

ii. ©The Premium amount which would be auto debited & frequency of instalment should be duly filled
in the ECS Mandate form.

iii. | New ECS Mandate Form is required to be filled in case of any change in the Premium due to change
of Sum Insured / age / plan /coverages/revision in premium.

iv. The Company should be informed at least 15 days prior to the due date of instalment premium if the
Insured Person wishes to discontinue the ECS facility.

v. | Non-payment of premium on due date as opted by the Insured Person in the mandate form subject
to an additional 15 days of relaxation period will lead to termination of the Policy.

q. Redressal of Grievance

In case of any grievance the insured person may contact the Company through:
e Website: www.hdfcergo.com
e = Toll free: 022 6234 6234 / 0120 6234 6234
e Contact Details for Senior Citizen: 022 6234 6234 / 0120 6234 6234
e = E-mail: care@hdfcergo.com

Insured Person may also approach the grievance cell at any of the Company’s branches with the details
of grievance.

If Insured Person is not satisfied with the redressal of grievance through one of the above methods,
Insured Person may contact the grievance officerat cgo@hdfcergo.com

For updated details of grievance officer, kindly refer the link: https://www.hdfcergo.com/customer-
voice/grievances

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
25|Page

--- Page 26 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

https://www.hdfcergo.com
/customer-
care/grievances/escalation
level 1

Call - : 022 6234 6234 /
0120 6234 6234

https://www.hdfcergo.co
m/customer-
care/grievances

Call - : 022 6234 6234 /
0120 6234 6234

https://www.hdfcergo.com/custo
mer-care/grievances/escalation
level 2

Call - : 022 6234 6234 / 0120
6234 6234

Contact us at

https://www.hdfcergo.com/ https://www.hdfcergo.com/ https://www.hdfcergo.com/
: Jeri customer-care/grievances |customer-care/grievances Call - :
Contact Point for customer-cares grievances Call - : 022 — 6242 — 6226 022 — 6242 — 6226
maou Call - : 022 - 6242 - 6226 *
Senior Citizen Email - Email -

Email - ae ar
seniorcitizen@hdfcergo.com seniorcitizen@hdfcergo.com |seniorcitizen@hdfcergo.com

Write tousat _feare@hdfcergo.com grievance@hdfcergo.com cgo@hdfcergo.com

The Grievance Cell, The Chief Grievance Officer,

HDFC ERGO General Registered &

Insurance Company Ltd., Corporate Office: HDFC House, ist
Grievance cell of any of our |D-301, 3rd Floor, Floor,

Branch office Eastern Business District 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H.
(Magnet Mall), T, Parekh
LBS Marg, Bhandup (West) |Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai —
Mumbai-400078 400020

If Insured Person is not satisfied with the redressal of grievance through above methods, the Insured
Person may also approach the office of Insurance Ombudsman of the respective area/region for
redressal of grievance as per Insurance Ombudsman Rules 2017. Grievance may also be lodged at
IRDAI Integrated Grievance Management System - https://igms.irda.gov.in/.

2. Specific General Terms & Conditions

a. Geography

This Policy only covers medical treatment taken within India. All payments under this Policy will
only be made in Indian Rupees within India.
The premium will be computed basis the city of residence provided by the insured person in the
application form. The premium that would be applicable zone wise and the cities defined in
each zone are as under:

e Tier 1: Delhi, NCR, Mumbai, Thane, Mumbai Suburban and Navi Mumbai, Surat, Anmedabad

& Vadodara
e Tier 2 : Rest of India- All other cities

The premium will be modified in case of mid -term address change involving migration from one
zone to another and would be calculated on pro-rata basis.

b. Insured Person
Only those persons named as Insured Persons in the Schedule shall be covered under this Policy.
Any eligible person may be added during the Policy Period after his application has been accepted
by Us and additional premium has been received. Insurance cover for this person shall only
commence once We have issued an endorsement confirming the addition of such person as an
Insured Person.
Any Insured Person in the policy has the option to migrate to similar indemnity health insurance
policy available with us at the time of renewal subject to underwriting with continuity benefit of

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

26|Page

--- Page 27 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

waiver of waiting period. provided the policy has been maintained without a break as per
portability/migration guidelines.

If an Insured Person dies, he will cease to be an Insured Person upon Us receiving all relevant
particulars in this regard. We will return a rateable part of the premium received for such person IF
AND ONLY IF there are no claims in respect of that Insured Person under the Policy.

c. Loadings & Discounts
We may apply a risk loading on the premium payable (based upon the declarations made in the
proposal form and the health status of the persons proposed for insurance). The maximum risk
loading applicable for an individual shall not exceed above 100% per diagnosis / medical condition
and an overall risk loading of over 150% per person. These loadings are applied from
Commencement Date of the Policy including subsequent renewal(s) with Us or on the receipt of the
request of increase in Sum Insured (for the increased Sum Insured).

We will inform You about the applicable risk loading through a counter offer letter. You need to
revert to Us with consent and additional premium (if any), within 7 days of the receipt of such
counter offer letter. In case, you neither accept the counter offer nor revert to Us within 7days, We
shall cancel Your application and refund the premium paid within next 7 days.

Please note that We will issue Policy only after getting Your consent and additional premium (if
any). Please visit our nearest branch to refer our underwriting guidelines if required.

We will provide a Family Discount of 5% if 2 members are covered and 10% if 3 or more family
members are covered under a single Easy Health Individual Health Insurance Plan. An additional
discount of 7.5% will be provided if insured person is paying two year premium, in advance as a
single premium. These discounts shall be applicable at inception and renewal of the policy

d. Notification of Claim

Treatment, Consultation or Procedure: We must be notified:
i. If any treatment for which a claim may be made is to | Immediately and in any event at least 48 hours
be taken and that treatment requires prior to the Insured Person’s admission.

Hospitalisation:
ii. If any treatment for which a claim may be made is Within 24 hours of the start of the Insured

to be taken and that treatment requires Person’s Hospitalisation.
Hospitalisation in an Emergency:

iii. | For all benefits which are contingent on Our prior Within 7 days of the Insured Person’s discharge
acceptance of a claim under Section B-1)a): post-hospitalisation.

e. Cashless Service:

Treatment, Consultation
or Procedure:

Treatment,
Consultation or
Procedure Taken
at:

Cashless Service | We must be given

is Available: notice that the Insured
Person wishes to take
advantage of the
cashless service
accompanied by full
particulars.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
27|Page

--- Page 28 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

If any planned treatment,
consultation or
procedure for which a
claim may be made:

Network Hospital

We will provide
cashless service
by making
payment to the
extent of Our
liability directly
to the Network
Hospital.

At least 48 hours before
the planned treatment
or hospitalisation.

If Any treatment,
consultation or
procedure for which a
claim may be made taken
in an Emergency:

Network Hospital

We will provide
cashless service
by making
payment to the
extent of Our

Within 24 hours after
the treatment or
Hospitalisation.

liability directly
to the Network
Hospital.

f. Supporting Documentation & Examination

The Insured Person or someone claiming on your behalf shall provide Us with any
documentation, medical records and information We A may request to establish the
circumstances of the claim, its quantum or Our liability for the claim within 15 days of the
earlier of Our request or the Insured Person’s discharge from Hospitalisation or completion of
treatment._The Company may accept claims where documents have been provided after a
delayed interval only in special circumstances and for the reasons beyond the control of the
insured. Such documentation will include but is not limited to the following:

i) Our claim form, duly completed and signed for on behalf of the Insured Person.

ii) Original bills (including but not limited to pharmacy purchase bill, consultation bill,
diagnostic bill and any attachments thereto like receipts or prescriptions in support of any
amount claimed which will then become Our property.

iii) All reports and records, including but not limited to all medical reports, case histories/indoor
case papers, investigation reports, treatment papers, discharge summaries

iv) A precise diagnosis of the treatment for which a claim is made.

v) A detailed list of the individual medical services and treatments provided and a unit price for
each.

vi) Prescriptions that name the Insured Person and in the case of drugs: the drugs prescribed,
their price and a receipt for payment. Prescriptions must be submitted with the corresponding
Medical Practitioner’s invoice

vii) All pre and post investigation, treatment and follow up (consultation) records pertaining to the
present ailment for which claim is being made

viii) All investigation, treatment and follow up records pertaining to the past ailment(s) since their
first diagnoses or detection

ix) Treating doctors certificate regarding missing information in case histories e.g. Circumstance of
injury and Alcohol or drug influence at the time of accident

x) Copy of settlement letter from other insurance company or TPA

xi) Stickers and invoice of implants used during surgery

xii) Copy of MLC (Medico legal case) records and FIR (First information report), in case of claims
arising out of an accident

xiii) Regulatory requirements as amended from time to time, currently mandatory NEFT (to enable
direct credit of claim amount in bank account) and KYC (recent ID/Address proof and
photograph) requirements

xiv) Legal heir certificate

g. The Insured Person will have to undergo medical examination by Our authorised Medical

Practitioner, as and when We may reasonably require, to obtain an independent opinion for the

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
28|Page

--- Page 29 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

purpose of processing any claim. We will bear the cost towards performing such medical
examination (at the specified location) of the Insured Person.
h. Non Disclosure or Misrepresentation:

i. If at the time of issuance of Policy or during continuation of the Policy, the information provided
to Us in the proposal form or otherwise, by You or the Insured Person or anyone acting on
behalf of You or an Insured Person is found to be incorrect, incomplete, suppressed or not
disclosed, wilfully or otherwise, the Policy shall be:

e Cancelled ab initio from the inception date or the renewal date (as the case may be), or
the Policy may be modified by Us, at our sole discretion, upon 15 day notice by
sending an endorsement to Your address shown in the Schedule and

e = The claim under such Policy if any, shall be rejected/repudiated forthwith.

ii. We may also exercise any of the below listed options for the purpose of continuing the health
insurance coverage in case of Non-Disclosure/Misrepresentation of Pre-existing diseases subject
to your prior consent;

a) Permanently exclude the disease/condition and continue with the Policy

b) Incorporate additional waiting period of not exceeding 4 years for the said undisclosed
disease or condition from the date the non-disclosed condition was detected and
continue with the Policy.

c) Levy underwriting loading from the first year of issuance of policy or renewal, whichever
is later.

The above options will not prejudice the rights of the Company to invoke cancellation under
clause i above.

i. Endorsements
This Policy constitutes the complete contract of insurance. This Policy cannot be changed by anyone
(including an insurance agent or broker) except Us. Any change that We make will be evidenced by
a written endorsement signed and stamped by Us.

j. Change of Policyholder
The Policyholder may be changed only at the time of renewal. The new policyholder must be a
member of the Insured Person’s immediate family. Such change would be subject to Our
acceptance and payment of premium (if any). The renewed Policy shall be treated as having
been renewed without break.

The Policyholder may be changed in case of his demise or him moving out of India during the
Policy Period.

k. Notices
Any notice, direction or instruction under this Policy shall be in writing and if it is to:
i) Any Insured Person, it would be sent to You at the address specified in Schedule /
endorsement
ii) Us, shall be delivered to Our address specified in the Schedule.
iii) No insurance agents, brokers or other person/ entity is authorised to receive any notice on Our
behalf.

|. | Dispute Resolution Clause
Any and all disputes or differences under or in relation to this Policy shall be determined by the
Indian Courts and subject to Indian law.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
29|Page

--- Page 30 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Section E. Other Terms & Conditions

1. Claim Related Information
For any claim related query, intimation of claim and submission of claim related documents, You can
contact HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited through:

Jurisdiction of Office

Customer Service No. 022-62346234 / 0120-62346234
Claim Intimation:
Email: healthclaims@hdfcergo.com

Claim document submission at HDFC ERGO General Insurance Co. Ltd.
address: Stellar IT Park, Tower-1

5th Floor, C - 25, Sector 62

Noida — 0120 398 8360

Additional Note: Please refer to the list of empanelled network centers on our website or the list
provided in the welcome kit.

2. List of Ombudsman

Office Detail
tee werals Union Territory, District)

AHMEDABAD - Shri Kuldip Singh
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,

Jeevan Prakash Building, 6th floor, Gujarat,
Tilak Marg, Relief Road, Dadra & Nagar Haveli,
Ahmedabad — 380 001. Daman and Diu.

Tel.: 079 - 25501201/02/05/06
Email: bimalokpal.ahmedabad@cioins.co.in

BHOPAL - Shri Guru Saran Shrivastava

BENGALURU - Smt. Neerja Shah

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Jeevan Soudha Building,PID No. 57-27-N-19
Ground Floor, 19/19, 24th Main Road,

JP Nagar, Ist Phase,

Bengaluru — 560 078.

Tel.: 080 - 26652048 / 26652049

Email: bimalokpal.bengaluru@cioins.co.in

Karnataka.

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Janak Vihar Complex, 2nd Floor,
6, Malviya Nagar, Opp. Airtel Office,

Near New Market, Madhya Pradesh

Bhopal — 462 003. Chattisgarh.
Tel.: 0755 - 2769201 / 2769202

Fax: 0755 - 2769203

Email: bimalokpal.bhopal@cioins.co.in

BHUBANESHWAR - Shri Suresh Chandra Orissa.

Panda
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
30|Page

--- Page 31 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

62, Forest park,

Bhubneshwar — 751 009.

Tel.: 0674 - 2596461 /2596455
Fax: 0674 - 2596429

Email: bimalokpal.bhubaneswar@cioins.co.in

CHANDIGARH - Dr. Dinesh Kumar Verma
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
S.C.O. No. 101, 102 & 103, 2nd Floor,
Batra Building, Sector 17 — D,

Chandigarh — 160 017.

Tel.: 0172 - 2706196 / 2706468

Fax: 0172 - 2708274

Email: bimalokpal.chandigarh@cioins.co.in

Punjab,

Haryana(excluding Gurugram, Faridabad,
Sonepat and Bahadurgarh)

Himachal Pradesh, Union Territories of
Jammu & Kashmir,

Ladakh & Chandigarh.

CHENNAI - Shri M. Vasantha Krishna
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Fatima Akhtar Court, 4th Floor, 453,
Anna Salai, Teynampet,

CHENNAI — 600 018.

Tel.: 044 - 24333668 / 24335284

Fax: 044 - 24333664

Email: bimalokpal.chennai@cioins.co.in

DELHI - Shri Sudhir Krishna

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
2/2 A, Universal Insurance Building,
Asaf Ali Road,

New Delhi — 110 002.

Tel.: 011 - 23232481/23213504
Email: bimalokpal.delhi@cioins.co.in

GUWAHATI - Shri Kiriti .B. Saha

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Jeevan Nivesh, 5th Floor,

Nr. Panbazar over bridge, S.S. Road,
Guwahati — 781001(ASSAM).

Tel.: 0361 - 2632204 / 2602205

Email: bimalokpal.guwahati@cioins.co.in

Tamil Nadu,

Tamil Nadu

PuducherryTown and

Karaikal (which are part of Puducherry).

Delhi &
Following Districts of Haryana - Gurugram,
Faridabad, Sonepat & Bahadurgarh.

Assam,

Meghalaya,

Manipur,

Mizoram,

Arunachal Pradesh,
Nagaland and Tripura.

HYDERABAD - Shri I. Suresh Babu
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
6-2-46, 1st floor, "Moin Court",

Lane Opp. Saleem Function Palace,
A. C. Guards, Lakdi-Ka-Pool,
Hyderabad - 500 004.

Tel.: 040 - 23312122

Fax: 040 - 23376599

Email: bimalokpal.hyderabad@cioins.co.in

Andhra Pradesh,

Telangana,

Yanam and

part of Union Territory of Puducherry.

JAIPUR - Smt. Sandhya Baliga
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Jeevan Nidhi — II Bldg., Gr. Floor,

Rajasthan.

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under

license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

31|Page

--- Page 32 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Bhawani Singh Marg,

Jaipur - 302 005.

Tel.: 0141 - 2740363

Email: bimalokpal.jaipur@cioins.co.in

ERNAKULAM - Ms. Poonam Bodra
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,

2nd Floor, Pulinat Bldg., Kerala,
Opp. Cochin Shipyard, M. G. Road, Lakshadweep,
Ernakulam - 682 015. Mahe-a part of Union Territory of
Tel.: 0484 - 2358759 / 2359338 Puducherry.
Fax: 0484 - 2359336
Email: bimalokpal.ernakulam@cioins.co.in
KOLKATA - Shri P. K. Rath
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Hindustan Bldg. Annexe, 4th Floor, West Bengal,
4, C.R. Avenue, aye

Sikkim,

KOLKATA - 700 072.
Tel.: 033 - 22124339 / 22124340
Fax : 033 - 22124341

Email: bimalokpal.kolkata@cioins.co.in

LUCKNOW -Shri Justice Anil Kumar
Srivastava

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
6th Floor, Jeevan Bhawan, Phase-ll,
Nawal Kishore Road, Hazratganj,
Lucknow - 226 001.

Tel.: 0522 - 2231330 / 2231331

Fax: 0522 - 2231310

Email: bimalokpal.lucknow@cioins.co.in

Andaman & Nicobar Islands.

Districts of Uttar Pradesh :

Lalitpur, Jhansi, Mahoba, Hamirpur, Banda,
Chitrakoot, Allahabad, Mirzapur, Sonbhabdra,
Fatehpur, Pratapgarh, Jaunpur,Varanasi,
Gazipur, Jalaun, Kanpur, Lucknow, Unnao,
Sitapur, Lakhimpur, Bahraich, Barabanki,
Raebareli, Sravasti, Gonda, Faizabad, Amethi,
Kaushambi, Balrampur, Basti,
Ambedkarnagar, Sultanpur, Maharajgang,
Santkabirnagar, Azamgarh, Kushinagar,
Gorkhpur, Deoria, Mau, Ghazipur, Chandauli,
Ballia, Sidharathnagar.

MUMBAI - Shri Milind A. Kharat
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
3rd Floor, Jeevan Seva Annexe,

S. V. Road, Santacruz (W),

Mumbai - 400 054.

Tel.: 022 - 26106552 / 26106960
Fax: 022 - 26106052

Email: bimalokpal.mumbai@cioins.co.in

Goa,
Mumbai Metropolitan Region
excluding Navi Mumbai & Thane.

NOIDA - Shri Chandra Shekhar Prasad
Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Bhagwan Sahai Palace

Ath Floor, Main Road,

Naya Bans, Sector 15,

Distt: Gautam Buddh Nagar,
U.P-201301.

Tel.: 0120-2514252 / 2514253

State of Uttaranchal and the following
Districts of Uttar Pradesh:

Agra, Aligarh, Bagpat, Bareilly, Bijnor,
Budaun, Bulandshehar, Etah, Kanooj,
Mainpuri, Mathura, Meerut, Moradabad,
Muzaffarnagar, Oraiyya, Pilibhit, Etawah,
Farrukhabad, Firozbad, Gautambodhanagar,
Ghaziabad, Hardoi, Shahjahanpur, Hapur,

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under

license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

32|Page

--- Page 33 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Email: bimalokpal.noida@cioins.co.in

PATNA - Shri N. K. Singh

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
1st Floor,Kalpana Arcade Building,,
Bazar Samiti Road,

Bahadurpur,

Patna 800 006.

Tel.: 0612-2680952

Email: bimalokpal.patna@cioins.co.in

PUNE - Shri Vinay Sah

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Jeevan Darshan Bldg., 3rd Floor,
C.T.S. No.s. 195 to 198,

N.C. Kelkar Road, Narayan Peth,
Pune — 411 030.

Tel.: 020-41312555

Email: bimalokpal.pune@cioins.co.in

Shamli, Rampur, Kashganj, Sambhal, Amroha,
Hathras, Kanshiramnagar, Saharanpur.

Bihar,
Jharkhand.

Maharashtra,
Area of Navi Mumbai and Thane
excluding Mumbai Metropolitan Region.

This Policy is subject to regulation 12 of IRDAI (Protection of Policyholder’s Interests) Regulations 2017.

Schedule of Benefits — Easy Health Individual

Standard Exclusive

per Policy Year 3.00, 4.00, 5.00 “ 7.50,10.00 “oe
(Rs. in Lakh) 5.00,7.5,10,15
1 ner

a) In-patient Covered Covered
Treatment
1 -

b) Pre- . Covered Covered
hospitalization
1c) Post-

<) OS" . Covered Covered
hospitalization
1 d) Day Care Covered Covered
Procedures
te) Domiciliary Covered Covered
Treatment
if

) Organ Covered Covered
Donor
1g)) Emergency | Upto Rs.2000 per sp yeas
Ambulance hospitalisation Upto Rs.2000 per hospitalisation
1h) Ayush Upto Rs
Benefit Upto Rs 20,000 Upto Rs 25,000 50,000

1 i) Daily Cash
for choosing
Shared
Accommodation
2 a) Daily Cash
for

Rs.500 per
Rs.500 per day, day,
Maximum Rs.3,000 Maximum
Rs.3,000
Not Covered Rs.300 per
day,

Rs.800 per day, Rs.1000 per
. day,
Maximum Maximum
Rs.4,800 Rs.6,000
Rs.500 per day, Rs.800 per
Maximum day,

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under

license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

33|Page

--- Page 34 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

an insured child Rs.9,000 Rs.24,000
2 b) Newborn Not Covered Additional Benefit on payment of additional
baby premium
2 0) Recovery Not Covered Not Covered Rs 10,000
2 d) Emergency Upto Rs.2.5
Air Ambulance Not covered Not covered Lacs per
hospitalisation
Normal Normal
Delivery Rs. Delivery Rs.
15,000* Normal Delivery 30,000*
Caesarean Rs. 25,000* Caesarean
Delivery Rs. Caesarean Delivery Rs.
25,000* Delivery Rs. 50,000*
. (* Including 40,000* (* Including
moore Not Covered Pre/Post Natal | (* Including Pre/Post Natal
limit of Pre/Post Natal limit of Rs.
Rs.1,500 and limit of Rs. 2,500 | 5,000 and
New Born and New Born New Born
limit of limit of Rs.3,500) | limit of
Rs.2,000) [Waiting Period Rs.5,000)
[Waiting of 6 years] [Waiting
Period of 6 Period of 4
years] Years]
Optional, if
opted then
Optional, if opted then the Critical
the Critical Illness Sum Illness Sum
4 Critical Illness | Insured 50% or 100% of | Optional, if opted then the Critical | Insured will be
(Optional In-patient Sum Insured Illness Sum Insured will be 50% or | 50% or 100%
benefit) subject to minimum of 100% of In-patient Sum Insured of In-patient
Rs 100,000 upto a Sum Insured
maximum of Rs. 10 Lacs upto a
maximum of
Rs 10 Lacs
5.1 Cumulative Additional 10% of Base Sum Insured on continuous renewal for each claim free
Bonus year subject to maximum 100% of Base Sum Insured. Reduced by 10% of Base
Sum Insured in event of a claim each year
Upto 8% discount on renewal premium subject to insured member achieving
. the average number of steps in each time interval prescribed in the grid by
5.2. Stay Active . . . . F .
either walking or running regularly to keep fit. Dependent children covered will
not be considered for calculation of average steps.
Upto 1% of Sum Insured
per Insured Person upto | Upto 1% of Sum Insured subject to a Maximum of
5.3. Health Rs.5000, only once at Rs.5,000 per Insured Person, only once at the end
Checkup the end of a block of of a block of every continuous three policy years
every continuous four
claim free years.

Benefits under 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 are subject to pre-authorisation by HDFC ERGO General Insurance
Limited

Schedule of Benefits — Easy Health Family
Standard Exclusive

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
34|Page

--- Page 35 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

Sum Insured per 15.00,20.00,
Policy per Policy | 2.00, 3.00, 4.00, 3.00, 4.00, 7.50,10.00 25.00, 50.00
Year (Rs. in 5.00,7.50,10.00,15.00 | 5.00 “oe
Lakh)
1 a) In-pati
a) In-patient Covered Covered
Treatment
1 -
b) Pre- : Covered Covered
hospitalization
1¢) Post- . Covered Covered
hospitalization
1
d) Day Care Covered Covered
Procedures
1 e) Domiciliary Covered Covered
Treatment
if
) Organ Covered Covered

Donor

1 g)) Emergency
Ambulance

1h) Ayush
Benefit

1 i) Daily Cash
for choosing
Shared
Accommodation

Upto Rs.2000 per
hospitalisation

Upto Rs 20,000 Upto Rs 25,000 Upto Rs 50,000

Rs.500 per Rs.800 per Rs.1000 per day,
day, day, Maximum Rs.6,000
Maximum Maximum
Rs.3,000 Rs.4,800
Rs.300 per Rs.500 per
day, day,
Maximum Maximum
Rs.9,000 Rs.15,000

Upto Rs.2000 per hospitalisation

Rs.500 per day,
Maximum Rs.3,000

2 a) Daily Cash
for
accompanying
an insured child

2 b) Newborn Not Covered
baby

Rs.800 per day,

Not Covered Maximum Rs.24,000

Additional Benefit on payment of additional premium

2 c) Recovery
Benefit

Not Covered

Not Covered

Rs 10,000

2 d) Emergency
Air Ambulance

Not covered

Not covered

Upto Rs.2.5 Lacs per
hospitalisation

Normal Normal Normal Delivery Rs.

Delivery Rs. Delivery Rs. | 30,000*

15,000* 25,000* Caesarean Delivery Rs.

Caesarean Caesarean 50,000*

Delivery Rs. Delivery Rs. | (* Including Pre/Post

25,000* 40,000* Natal limit of Rs. 5,000
3 a) Maternity (* Including (* Including | and New Born limit of
Expenses Not Covered Pre/Post Pre/Post Rs.5,000) .

Natal limit of | Natal limit [Waiting Period of 3

Rs.1,500 and | of Rs. 2,500 | Years]

New Born and New

limit of Born limit of

Rs.2,000) Rs.3,500)

[Waiting [Waiting

Period 4 Period 4

years] years]

4 Critical Illness
(Optional
benefit)

Optional, if opted
then the Critical
Illness Sum Insured

Optional, if opted then the
Critical Illness Sum Insured
will be 50% or 100% of In-

Optional, if opted then
the Critical Illness Sum
Insured will be 50% or

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
35|Page

--- Page 36 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

50% or 100% of In-
patient Sum Insured
subject to minimum
of Rs 100,000 upto a
maximum of Rs 10
Lacs

Additional 10% of Base Sum Insured on continuous renewal for each claim free
year subject to maximum 100% of Base Sum Insured. Reduced by 10% of Base
5.1. Cumulative | Sum Insured in event of a claim each year. In relation to a Family Floater, the
bonus cumulative bonus so applied will only be available in respect of claims made by
those Insured Persons who were Insured Persons in the claim free Policy Year
and continue to be Insured Persons in the subsequent Policy Year.

Upto 8% discount on renewal premium subject to insured member achieving the
average number of steps in each time interval prescribed in the grid by either
5.2. Stay Active | walking or running regularly to keep fit. In a floater policy it would be an average
of all adult members covered. Dependent children covered will not be
considered for calculation of average steps.

patient Sum Insured 100% of In-patient Sum
Insured upto a maximum

of Rs 10 Lacs

Upto 1% of Sum

Insured per Policy Upto 1% of Sum Insured per Policy subject to a

upto Rs.5000, only Maximum of Rs. 5,000 per Insured Person, only once at
5.3. Health . .

once at the end of a the end of a block of every continuous three policy
Checkup

block of every years.

continuous four claim

free years

Benefits under 5.1,5.2,5.3 are subject to pre-authorisation by HDFC ERGO General Insurance
Limited

Annexure | —

List_| - Items for which coverage is not available in the polic
BABY FOOD

OXYGEN CYLINDER (FOR USAGE OUTSIDE THE
HOSPITAL)
BABY UTILITIES CHARGES

SPACER
BEAUTY SERVICES

SPIROMETRE
BELTS/ BRACES NEBULIZER KIT
BUDS

| 6 | COLD PACK/HOT PACK
CARRY BAGS

a

Nini sjJH/HRIHRILAISD HIP ILHR [WLW] Ww] w uw
OSOSOINI Das NI[R}]O];O;]OIN uw

FOOD CHARGES (OTHER THAN 43 SPLINT
PATIENT'S DIET PROVIDED BY
HOSPITAL)

fay

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
36|Page

--- Page 37 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

EYELET COLLAR 52

SUGAR FREE TABLETS
20 | BLOOD GROUPING AND CROSS 54 | CREAMS POWDERS LOTIONS (TOILETRIES ARE
MATCHING OF DONORS SAMPLES NOT PAYABLE, ONLY PRESCRIBED MEDICAL

PRIVATE NURSES CHARGES- SPECIAL NURSING
CHARGES

PHARMACEUTICALS PAYABLE)

21 | SERVICE CHARGES WHERE NURSING 55 ECG ELECTRODES
/ enmcexsocurers | [en
56

24 | ATTENDANT CHARGES 58 ANY KIT WITH NO DETAILS MENTIONED
[DELIVERY KIT, ORTHOKIT, RECOVERY KIT, ETC]

EXTRA DIET OF PATIENT (OTHER THAN | 59 KIDNEY TRAY
THAT WHICH FORMS PART OF BED
CHARGE)

N
wn

BIRTH CERTIFICATE 160 | MASK
CERTIFICATE CHARGES OUNCE GLASS

COURIER CHARGES OXYGEN MASK

MEDICAL CERTIFICATE
PHOTOCOPIES CHARGES }66 | UROMETER, URINEJUG
MORTUARY CHARGES
| 34 | WALKING AIDSCHARGES | 68 | VASOFIXSAFETY,

List Il— Items that are to be subsumed into Room Charges

1
2
3
5

7 EAU-DE-COLOGNE / ROOM FRESHNERS

10
in
12
13
14
15 FACE MASK

16
17

18 SPUTUM CUP
19 DISINFECTANT LOTIONS

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
37|Page

--- Page 38 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

20 LUXURY TAX

AIR CONDITIONER CHARGES

IM IV INJECTION CHARGES

CLEAN SHEET

BLANKET/WARMER BLANKET

ADMISSION KIT
DIABETIC CHART CHARGES
DOCUMENTATION CHARGES / ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

DISCHARGE PROCEDURE CHARGES
DAILY CHART CHARGES
ENTRANCE PASS / VISITORS PASS CHARGES

EXPENSES RELATED TO PRESCRIPTION ON DISCHARGE

FILE OPENING CHARGES

135 | INCIDENTAL EXPENSES / MISC. CHARGES (NOT EXPLAINED)
136 | PATIENT IDENTIFICATION BAND / NAME TAG
| 37 | PULSEOXYMETER CHARGES

List Ill — Items that are to be subsumed into Procedure Charges

HAIR REMOVAL CREAM
DISPOSABLES RAZORS CHARGES (for site preparations)

11 MICROSCOPE COVER

12 SURGICAL BLADES, HARMONICSCALPEL,SHAVER
13 SURGICAL DRILL

15
16
17
18
19
20
7

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223

38|Page

--- Page 39 of D4.pdf ---
HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited

22
23

TORNIQUET
ORTHOBUNDLE, GYNAEC BUNDLE

List IV — Items that are to be subsumed into costs of treatment

ray

ADMISSION/REGISTRATION CHARGES
HOSPITALISATION FOR EVALUATION/ DIAGNOSTIC PURPOSE

URINE CONTAINER

BLOOD RESERVATION CHARGES AND ANTE NATAL BOOKING CHARGES
BIPAP MACHINE

CPAP/ CAPD EQUIPMENTS

INFUSION PUMP— COST

HYDROGEN PEROXIDE\SPIRIT\ DISINFECTANTS ETC

NUTRITION PLANNING CHARGES - DIETICIAN CHARGES- DIET CHARGES
HIV KIT

ANTISEPTIC MOUTHWASH
LOZENGES

MOUTH PAINT

4 | VACCINATION CHARGES
ALCOHOL SWABES

6 | SCRUB SOLUTION/STERILLIUM

w

wo

N

Glucometer& Strips

8 | URINE BAG

ray

|4 |
[6 |

HDFC ERGO General Insurance Company Limited. IRDAI Reg. No.146. CIN: U66030MH2007PLC177117. Registered &
Corporate Office: 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H. T. Parekh Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai — 400
020. Trade Logo displayed above belongs to HDFC Ltd and ERGO International AG and used by the Company under
license. Easy Health UIN: HDFHLIP23024V072223
39|Page