

--- Page 1 of D5.pdf ---
For Buy/ Renew/ Service/ Claim related queries Log on to www.icicilombard.com or call 1800 2666

0 icici €Lombard

Nibhaye Vaade

Golden Shield
Policy Wording

Preamble

This Policy has been issued on the basis of the Disclosure to
information Norm, including the information provided by
Proposer in respect of the Insured Persons in the Proposal
Form, any application for insurance cover in respect of any
Insured Person and any other information or details
submitted in relation to the Proposal Form. This Policy is a
contract of insurance between You and Us which is subject
to the receipt of premium in full and accepted by Us in
respect of the Insured Persons and the terms, conditions
and exclusions as specified in the Policy/ Policy Schedule /
Product Benefit Table of this Policy.

Definitions

For the purposes of this Policy, the terms specified below
shall have the meaning set forth wherever appearing/
specified in this Policy or related Extensions:

Where the context so requires, references to the singular
shall also include references to the plural and references to
any gender shall include references to all genders. Further
any references to statutory enactment include subsequent
changes to the same.

i. Standard definitions (Definitions whose wordings
are specified by IRDAI)

Accident means a sudden, unforeseen and involuntary
event caused by external, visible and violent means.

Any one illness means continuous Period of illness and
it includes relapse within 45 days from the date of last
consultation with the Hospital/Nursing Home where
treatment was taken.

Ayush Hospital is a healthcare facility wherein
medical/surgical/para-surgical treatment procedures
and interventions are carried out by AYUSH Medical
practitioner(s) comprising of any of the following:

a. Central or State government AYUSH hospital; or

b. Teaching hospital attached to AYUSH college
recognized by the central government/Central
council of Indian medicine/ Central council for
Homeopathy; or

c. AYUSH Hospital, standalone or co-located with in-
patient healthcare facility of any recognized
system of medicine, registered with the local
authorities, wherever applicable, and is under the
supervision of a qualified registered AYUSH
medical practitioner and must comply with the
following criterion:

i. Having atleast 5 in-patient beds

ii. Having qualified AYUSH medical practitioner
in charge round the clock

iii. Having dedicated AYUSH therapy sections as
required and/or has equipped operation

theatre where surgical procedures are to be
carried out;

iv. Maintaining daily records of the patients and
making them accessible to the insurance
company’s authorized representative

AYUSH Day Care Centre means and includes
Community Health Centre (CHC), Primary Health
Centre (PHC), Dispensary, Clinic, Polyclinic or any such
health centre which is registered with the local
authorities, wherever applicable and having facilities
for carrying out treatment procedures and medical or
surgical/para-surgical interventions or both under the
supervision of registered AYUSH Medical Practitioner
(s) on day care basis without in- patient services and
must comply with all the following criterion:

a. Having qualified registered AYUSH Medical
Practitioner(s) in charge;

b. Having dedicated AYUSH therapy sections as
required and/or has equipped operation theatre
where surgical procedures are to be carried out;

c. Maintaining daily records of the patients and
making them accessible to the insurance
company’s authorized representative.

(Explanation: Medical practitioner referred in the
definition of “AYUSH Hospital” and “AYUSH day care
center” shall carry the same meaning as defined in the
definition of “Medical practitioner” under chapter | of
Guidelines)

Cashless Facility means a facility extended by the
insurer to the insured where the payments, of the costs
of treatment undergone by the insured in accordance
with the policy terms and conditions, are directly made
to the network provider by the insurer to the extent pre-
authorization approved.

Condition Precedent shall mean a policy term or
condition upon which the Insurer's liability under the
policy is conditional upon.

Congenital Anomaly refers to a condition(s) which is
present since birth, and which is abnormal with
reference to form, structure or position.

a. Internal Congenital Anomaly -Congenital anomaly
which is not in the visible and accessible parts of
the body

b. External Congenital Anomaly- Congenital
anomaly which is in the visible and accessible
parts of the body

Co-payment means a cost sharing requirement under
a health insurance policy that provides that the
policyholder/insured/proposer will bear a specified
percentage of the admissible claims amount. A co-
payment does not reduce the Sum Insured.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 2 of D5.pdf ---
Cumulative Bonus shall mean any increase or addition
in the Sum Insured granted by the insurer without an
associated increase in premium.

Day care centre means any institution established for
day care treatment of illness and/or injuries or a
medical setup with a hospital and which has been
registered with the local authorities, wherever
applicable, and is under supervision of a registered and
qualified medical practitioner AND must comply with
all minimum criterion as under :-

a. has qualified nursing staff under its employment;
b. has qualified medical practitioner/s in charge

c. has fully equipped operation theatre of its own
where surgical procedures are carried out;

d. maintains daily records of patients and will make
these accessible to the insurance company’s
authorized personnel

Day Care Treatment refers to medical treatment, and/
or Surgical Procedure which is

i. undertaken under General or Local Anesthesia ina
Hospital/ Day care centre in less than 24 hrs
because of technological advancement, and

ii; which would have otherwise required a
hospitalisation of more than 24 hours.

Treatment normally taken on an out-patient basis is
not included in the scope of this definition.

Deductible is a cost sharing requirement under a
health insurance policy that provides that provides
that the insurer will not be liable for specified rupee
amountin case of indemnity policies and for a specified
number of days/hours in case of hospital cash policies,
which will apply before any benefits are payable by the
insurer A deductible does not reduce the sum insured.

Dental treatment means a treatment related to teeth
or structures supporting teeth including examinations,
fillings (where appropriate), crowns, extractions and
surgery.

Disclosure to information Norm means the policy shall
be void and all premium paid thereon shall be forfeited
to the Company in the event of misrepresentation, mis-
description or non-disclosure of any material fact.

Domiciliary Hospitalisation means medical treatment
for an illness/disease/injury which in the normal course
would require care and treatment at a hospital but is
actually taken while confined at home under any of the
following circumstances:

a. the condition of the patient is such that he/she is
notin a condition to be removed to a hospital, or

b. the patient takes treatment at home on account of
non-availability of room in a hospital.

Emergency Care means management for an illness or
injury which results in symptoms which occur suddenly
and unexpectedly, and requires immediate care by a
medical practitioner to prevent death or serious long
term impairment of the insured person’s health

Golden Shield

Grace Period means the specified period of time
immediately following the premium due date during
which a payment can be made to renew or continue a
policy in force without loss of continuity benefits such
as waiting periods and coverage of Pre Existing
Diseases. Coverage is not available for the period for
which no premium is received.

Hospital means any institution established for in-
patient care and day care treatment of illness and / or
injuries and which has been registered as a hospital
with the local authorities under the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulations) Act
2010 or under enactments specified under the
Schedule of Section 56(1) of the said Act Or comply
with all minimum criteria as under:

a. has qualified nursing staff under its employment
round the clock;

b. has at least 10 inpatient beds, in those towns
having a population of less than 10,00,000 and 15
inpatient beds in all other places

c. has qualified medical practitioner(s) in charge
round the clock;

d. has a fully equipped operation theatre of its own
where surgical procedures are carried out

e. maintains daily records of patients and makes
these accessible to the Insurance company’s
authorized personnel.

Hospitalisation means admission in a Hospital for a
minimum period of 24 consecutive in-patient care
hours except for specified Procedures/Treatments,
where such admission could be for a period of less than
24 consecutive hours.

Inpatient care means treatment for which the insured
person has to stay in a Hospital for more than 24 hours
for a covered event.

Illness means a sickness or disease or pathological
condition leading to the impairment of normal
physiological function and requires medical treatment.

a. Acute condition - Acute condition is a disease,
illness or injury that is likely to respond quickly to
treatment which aims to return the person to his or
her state of health immediately before suffering
the disease/illness/injury which leads to full
recovery.

b. Chronic condition - A chronic condition is defined
as a disease, illness, or injury that has one or more
of the following characteristics:

i. it needs ongoing or long-term monitoring
through consultations, examinations, check-
ups, and/ortests

ii. it needs ongoing or long-term control or relief
of symptoms

iii. it requires your rehabilitation for the patient or
for the patient to be specially trained to cope
with it

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 3 of D5.pdf ---
iv. it continues indefinitely
v.  Itrecurs oris likely to recur

Injury means any accidental physical bodily harm,
excluding illness or disease solely and directly caused
by external, violent, visible and evident means which is
verified and certified by a Medical Practitioner.

Intensive Care Unit means an identified section, ward
or wing of a hospital which is under the constant
supervision of a dedicated medical practitioner(s), and
which is specially equipped for the continuous
monitoring and treatment of patients who are in a
critical condition, or require life support facilities and
where the level of care and supervision is considerably
more sophisticated and intensive than in the ordinary
and other wards

ICU (Intensive Care Unit) Charges means the amount
charged by a Hospital towards ICU expenses which
shall include the expenses for ICU bed, general medical
support services provided to any ICU patient including
monitoring devices, critical care nursing and intensivist
charges.

Maternity expenses means;

a. medical treatment expenses traceable to childbirth
(including complicated deliveries and caesarean
sections incurred during Hospitalisation);

b. expenses towards lawful medical termination of
pregnancy during the policy period.

Medical Advice means any consultation or advice from
a Medical Practitioner including the issuance of any
prescription or follow-up prescription.

Medical Expenses means those expenses that an
Insured Person has necessarily and actually incurred
for medical treatment on account of Illness or Accident
on the advice of a Medical Practitioner, as long as these
are no more than would have been payable if the
Insured Person had not been insured and no more than
other hospitals or doctors in the same locality would
have charged for the same medical treatment.

Medically Necessary Treatment is defined as any
treatment, tests medication or stay in hospital or part
of a stay in Hospital which

1. Is required for the medical management of the
illness or Injury suffered by the insured

2. Must not exceed the level of care necessary to
provide safe, adequate and appropriate medical
care in scope, duration or intensity

3. Must have been prescribed by a Medical
practitioner

4. Must conform to the professional standard widely
accepted in international medical practice or by the
medical community in India

Migration means the right accorded to health
insurance policyholders/proposers (including all
members under family cover and members of group

Golden Shield

Health insurance policy), to transfer the credit gained
for pre-existing conditions and time bound exclusions,
with the same insurer.

Network Provider means hospitals or health care
providers enlisted by an insurer, TPA or jointly by an
insurer and TPA to provide medical services to an
insured by acashless facility.

Non-Network Provider means any Hospital, day care
centre or other provider that is not part of the Network.

Notification of claim means the process of intimating a
claim to the insurer or TPA through any of the
recognized modes of communication

OPD treatment is one in which the Insured visits a
clinic / hospital or associated facility like a consultation
room for diagnosis and treatment based on the advice
of a Medical Practitioner. The Insured is not admitted as
a day care or in-patient.

Portability means the right accorded to an individual
health insurance policyholder/proposers (including all
members under family cover), to transfer the credit
gained for pre-existing conditions and time bound
exclusions, from one insurer to another insurer

Pre-existing Disease means any condition, ailment,
injury or disease

a. That is/ are diagnosed by a physician within 48
months prior to the effective date of the policy
issued by the insurer or its reinstatement or

b. For which medical advice or treatment was
recommended by, or received from, a physician
within 48 months prior to the effective date of the
policy issued by the insurer or its reinstatement.

Post-Hospitalisation Medical Expenses means
medical expenses incurred during predefined number
of days immediately after the Insured Person is
discharged from the hospital, provided that:

a. Such Medical Expenses are for the same condition
for which the Insured Person’s Hospitalisation was
required, and

b. The In-patient Hospitalisation claim for such
Hospitalisation is admissible by the Insurance
Company.

Pre-Hospitalisation Medical Expenses means

medical expenses incurred during predefined number

of days preceding the hospitalization of the insured
person, provided that:

a. Such Medical Expenses are incurred for the same
condition for which the Insured Person’s
Hospitalisation was required, and

b. The In-patient Hospitalisation claim for such
Hospitalisation is admissible by the Insurance
Company.

Qualified Nurse is a person who holds a valid
registration from the Nursing Council of India or the
Nursing Council of any state in India.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 4 of D5.pdf ---
Reasonable and Customary Charges means the
charges for services or supplies, which are the
standard charges for the specific provider and
consistent with the prevailing charges in the
geographical area for identical or similar services,
taking into account the nature of Illness/injury involved.

Renewal defines the terms on which the contract of
insurance can be renewed on mutual consent with a
provision of grace period for treating the renewal
continuous for the purpose of gaining credit for pre-
existing diseases, time-bound exclusions and for all
waiting periods.

Room Rent means the amount charged by a hospital
towards Room and Boarding expenses and shall
include associated medical expenses.

Subrogation shall mean the right of the insurer to
assume the rights of the insured person to recover
expenses paid out under the policy that may be
recovered from any other source.

Surgery or Surgical Procedure means manual and/or
operative procedure (s) required for treatment of an
illness or injury, correction of deformities and defects,
diagnosis and cure of diseases, relief of suffering or
prolongation of life, performed in a hospital or day care
centre by a Medical Practitioner

Unproven/Experimental treatment means treatment
including drug experimental therapy which is not
based on established medical practice in India, is
treatment experimental or unproven.

ii. Specific definitions (Definitions other than those

mentioned under c. |. above)

Admission means Your admission in a Hospital as an
inpatient for the purpose of medical treatment of an
Injury and/or Illness.

AYUSH treatments refers to the medical aid and / or
hospitalisation treatments given under ‘Ayurveda,
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homeopathy systems

Annual Sum Insured means and denotes the
maximum amount of cover available to You during
each Policy Year of the Policy Period, as stated in the
Policy Schedule or any revisions thereof based on
Claim settled under the Policy.

Break in Policy occurs at the end of the existing policy
term, when the premium due for renewal on a given
policy is not paid on or before the premium renewal
date or within 30 days thereof.

Claim means a demand made by You or on Your behalf
for payment of Medical Expenses or any other
expenses or benefits, as covered under the Policy.

Immediate Family means spouse, dependent children,
brother(s), sister(s) and dependent parent(s) of the
insured.

Insured/Insured Person(s) means the individual(s)
whose name(s) is/are specifically appearing as such in

Golden Shield

the Policy Schedule and is/are hereinafter referred as
“You’/“Your’/“Yours’/ “Yourself”

Medical Practitioner is a person who holds a valid
registration from the Medical Council of any State or
Medical Council of India or Council for Indian Medicine
or for Homeopathy set up by the Government of India
or a State Government and is thereby entitled to
practice medicine within its jurisdiction; and is acting
within the scope and jurisdiction of his license.

The term Medical Practitioner would include physician,
specialist, anaesthetist and surgeon but would exclude
You and Your spouse, Your children, Your brother(s),
Your sister(s) and Your parent(s).

Period of Insurance means the period as specifically
appearing in the Policy Schedule and commencing
from the Policy Period Start Date of the first Policy
taken by You from Us and then, running concurrent to
Your current Policy subject to the Your continuous
renewal of such Policy with Us.

Policy means these Policy wordings, the Policy
Schedule and any applicable endorsements or
extensions attaching to or forming part thereof. The
Policy contains details of the extent of cover available
to You, what is excluded from the cover and the terms &
conditions on which the Policy is issued to You.

Proposer means the person(s) or the entity named in
the Policy Schedule who executed the Policy Schedule
andis (are) responsible for payment of premium(s).

Policy Period means the period commencing from the
Policy Period Start Date, Time and ending at the Policy
Period End Date, Time of the Policy and as specifically
appearing in the Policy Schedule.

Policy Year means a period of twelve months
beginning from the Policy Period Start Date and ending
on the last day of such twelve-month period. For the
purpose of subsequent years, “Policy Year” shall mean
a period of twelve months beginning from the end of
the previous Policy Year and lapsing on the last day of
such twelve-month period, till the Policy Period End
Date, as specified in the Policy Schedule

Service Provider means any person, organization,
institution, or company that has been empanelled with
Us to provide services specified under the Benefits
(including add-ons) to The Insured person. These shall
also include all healthcare providers empanelled to
form a part of network other than hospitals.

The list of the Service Providers is available at our

website (https:/www.icicilombard.com/content/ilom-
en/serviceprovider/search.asp) and is subject to

amendment from time to time.

You/Your/ Yours/ Yourself means the person(s) that
We insure and is/are specifically named as Insured /
Insured Person(s) inthe Policy Schedule.

We/ Our/ Ours/ Us means the ICICI Lombard General
Insurance Company Limited

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 5 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

Benefits covered under the policy

The Benefits listed in base cover are in-built benefits and
shall be available to all Insured Persons in accordance with
the procedures set outin this Policy wording.

This Policy covers Allopathic and AYUSH treatments taken
in India ONLY. Any expenses incurred outside the policy
period will NOT be covered.

Any claims made under any of the benefits mentioned
below (except Care management program, Care
management plus program,) will impact eligibility for
Additional Sum Insured.

Any unutilized annual sum insured/tele-consultations/e-

consultations/benefits cannot be carried forward to the
next policy year.

Base Cover

1.

In Patient Treatment

We will cover the following Medical Expenses incurred in
respect of Hospitalization of the Insured Person during the
Policy Period, up to the Annual Sum Insured specified in the
Policy Schedule against this Benefit:

i. Room Rent up to Twin sharing room (for Annual Sum
Insured below % 10 Lacs and Single private AC room for
annual sum insured ® 10L and above);

ii. Intensive Care Unit Charges;
iii. Qualified Nurse charges;
iv. Medical Practitioner's Fees ;

v. Anaesthesia, blood, oxygen, operation theatre
charges, medicines, drugs and consumables (other
than those specified in the list of excluded expenses
(non-medical) in Annexure |;

vi. Surgical appliances and prosthetic devices
recommended in writing by the attending Medical
Practitioner and that are used intra operatively during
a Surgical Procedure;

vii. Cost of investigative tests or prescribed diagnostic
procedures directly related to the Injury/Illness for
which the Insured Person is Hospitalized;

We will consider a claim under this Benefit, subject to the
following:

i. The Hospitalization is for Medically Necessary
Treatment.

ii. The hospitalization warrants inpatient admission in
view of active line of treatment.

iii. The Hospitalization commences and continues on the
written advice of a Medical Practitioner.

iv. The Medical Expenses incurred are Reasonable and
Customary Charges.

v. If the Insured Person is admitted in a room category/
limit that is higher than the one that is specified in the
Policy Schedule/ Product benefit table of this policy,
then the Insured Person shall bear a rateable
proportion of the total Associated medical expenses
(including surcharges or taxes thereon) in the

proportion of the difference between room rent of the
entitled room category to the room rent actually
incurred

a. For the purpose of this cover, “Associated medical
expenses” shall include room rent, nursing
charges, operation theatre charges, fees of
medical practitioner including surgeon/
anaesthetist / specialist within the same hospital
where the insured person has been admitted and
will not include the cost of pharmacy and
consumables, cost of implants, medical devices
and cost of diagnostics.

b. Proportionate deductions are not applicable for
ICU charges

c. Proportionate deductions shall not be applicable
for hospitals which do not follow differential billing
or for those expenses in respect of which
differential billing is not adopted based on the
room category.

vi. Expenses associated with automation machine for
peritoneal dialysis shall not be payable

vii. Any Medical Expenses payable shall not in aggregate
exceed the Annual Sum Insured and additional sum
insured / cumulative bonus (if any) as specified in the
Policy Schedule against this Benefit.

Day Care Treatment

We will cover the Medical Expenses incurred in respect of
the Day Care Treatment of the Insured Person during the
Policy Period provided that:

i. The Day Care Treatment is for Medically Necessary
Treatment.

ii. The Day Care Treatment follows the written advice of a
Medical Practitioner.

iii. The Medical Expenses incurred are Reasonable and
Customary Charges.

iv. We will also cover Medical Expenses incurred for
procedures including but not limited to intravenous
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, hemodialysis or any
other therapeutic procedure which requires a period of
specialized observation or medical care after
completion of the procedure.

v. We will not cover any Out Patient Treatment or
diagnostic services under this Benefit.

vi. Expenses associated with automation machine for
peritoneal dialysis shall not be payable

vii. Any Medical Expenses payable shall not in aggregate
exceed the Sum Insured and additional sum insured/
cumulative bonus (if any) specified in the Policy
Schedule against this Benefit.

Coverage for Modern Treatments

We will cover the Medical Expenses incurred in respect of
Hospitalization of the Insured Person for the below
mentioned modern treatments during the Policy Period, up
tothe Annual Sum Insured

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 6 of D5.pdf ---
Sr. No.| Treatment/Procedure

intensity focused ultrasound)

1 Uterine Artery Embolization and HIFU (High

2 Immunotherapy- Monoclonal Antibody to
be given as injection

3 Vaporisation of the prostrate (Green laser
treatment or holmium laser treatment)

4 Stemcelltherapy: Hematopoieticstemcells
forbonemarrowtransplantfor
haematologicalconditions

5 Balloon Sinuplasty

6 Oral Chemotherapy

7 Robotic surgeries*

8 Stereotactic radio Surgeries

9 Deep Brain stimulation

10 Intra vitreal injections

11 Bronchical Thermoplasty

12 IONM - (Intra Operative Neuro Monitoring)

Robotic surgeries shall be subject to sub-limits as
mentioned under d. benefits covered under the policy
Base cover 15 Sub-limits applicable

Pre Hospitalisation expenses

We will cover the Pre-hospitalization Medical Expenses
incurred in respect of the Insured Person for up to 60days
immediately before the Insured Person’s Admission to
Hospital provided that:

i. The Pre-hospitalization Medical Expenses incurred are
Reasonable and Customary Charges.

ii. We have accepted the claim under “d. Benefits covered
under the policy Base cover 1. Inpatient Treatment” in
respect of the Insured Person.

iii. We shall not be liable to make any payment in respect
of any Pre-hospitalization Medical Expenses incurred
prior to the Policy Period Start Date of the first policy
with Us in respect of the Insured Person.

iv. Expenses incurred on nursing care at home are
excluded from the scope of pre hospitalization
expenses.

v. This Benefit will be provided on a reimbursement basis
only.

vi. Any Pre-hospitalization Medical Expenses payable
shall not in aggregate exceed the Annual Sum Insured
and additional sum insured /cumulative bonus (if any)
as specified in the Policy Schedule against this Benefit

Post Hospitalisation expenses

We will cover the Post-hospitalization Medical Expenses
incurred in respect of the Insured Person for up to 180 days
immediately following the Insured Person’s discharge from
Hospital provided that:

i. The Post-hospitalization Medical Expenses incurred
are Reasonable and Customary Charges.

Golden Shield

ii. We have accepted the claim under “Inpatient
Treatment” in respect of the Insured Person.

iii. We will also consider Post-hospitalization Medical
Expenses incurred on Physiotherapy provided that
such Physiotherapy is advised in writing by the
treating Medical Practitioner and is Medically
Necessary Treatment. This service will be provided on
a reimbursement and/ or cashless basis where ever
applicable.

iv. Expenses incurred on nursing care at home are
excluded from the scope of post hospitalization
expenses.

v. Any Post-hospitalization Medical Expenses payable
during the Policy period shall not in aggregate exceed
the Annual Sum Insured and additional sum insured
/cumulative bonus (if any) as specified in the Policy
Schedule against this Benefit.

Donor Expenses

We will cover the Medical Expenses incurred in respect of
an organ donor’s Hospitalization during the Policy Period
for the harvesting of the organ donated to the Insured
Person provided that:

i. | The organ donation conforms to the Transplantation of
Human Organs Act 1994 and the organ is for the use of
the Insured Person;

ii. We will cover only those Medical Expenses incurred in
respect of an organ donor as an in-patient in the
Hospital.

iii. The Medical Expenses incurred are Reasonable and
Customary Charges.

iv. Any Medical Expenses payable during the Policy
period shall not in aggregate exceed the Annual Sum
Insured and additional sum insured /cumulative bonus
(if any) as specified in the Policy Schedule against this
Benefit subject to an overall limit of = 10,00,000 only

v. We have accepted a claim under Section “Inpatient
treatment” in respect of the Insured Person.

We shall not be liable to pay for any claim under this Benefit
which arises directly or indirectly for or in connection with
any of the following:

i. Pre-hospitalization Medical Expenses or Post-
hospitalization Medical Expenses of the organ donor.

ii. Screening expenses of the organ donor.

iii. Any other Medical Expenses as a result of the
harvesting from the organ donor.

iv. Costs directly or indirectly associated with the
acquisition of the donor’s organ (other than
hospitalisation costs involved).

v. Transplant of any organ/tissue where the transplant is
experimental or investigational.

vi. Expenses related to organ transportation or
preservation.

vii. Expenses incurred by an Insured Person as a donor.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 7 of D5.pdf ---
viii. Any other medical treatment or complication in respect
of the donor, consequent to harvesting.

Domiciliary Hospitalization
We will cover the Medical Expenses incurred in respect of

the Domiciliary Hospitalization of the Insured Person
during the Policy Period provided that:

i. The Domiciliary Hospitalization is for Medically
Necessary Treatment.

ii. The Domiciliary Hospitalization commences and
continues on the written advice of a Medical
Practitioner.

iii. The Medical Expenses incurred are Reasonable and
Customary Charges.

iv. The Domiciliary Hospitalization continues for atleast 3
consecutive days in which case We will make payment
under this Benefit in respect of Medical Expenses
incurred from the first day of Domiciliary
Hospitalization.

v. Any Medical Expenses payable shall not in aggregate
exceed the Annual Sum Insured and additional sum
insured /cumulative bonus (if any) as specified in the
Policy Schedule against this Benefit.

We shall not be liable to pay for any claim under this Benefit

which arises directly or indirectly from or in connection with

any of the following:

a) Asthma, bronchitis, tonsillitis and upper respiratory
tract infection including laryngitis and pharyngitis,
cough and cold, influenza;

b) Arthritis, gout and rheumatism;

c) Ailments of spine/disc

d) Chronic nephritis and nephritic syndrome;

e) Anyliver disease;

f) Peptic ulcer

g) Diarrhea and all type of dysenteries, including
gastroenteritis;

h) Diabetes mellitus and insipidus;
i) Epilepsy;

Jj) Hypertension;

k) Pyrexia of any origin

Home Care Treatment

We will cover the medical expenses incurred by the Insured
person on home care treatment maximum up to 5% of
Annual Sum Insured provided that:

a. The Medical Practitioner advices the Insured Person to
undergo treatment at home

b. There is a continuous active line of treatment with
monitoring of the health status by a medical
practitioner for each day through the duration of the
home care treatment.

c. Daily monitoring chart including records of the
treatment duly signed by the treating doctor is
maintained.

Golden Shield

d. The condition of the Insured Person is expected to
improve in a reasonable and foreseeable period of
time.

e. Prior approval from Us has been taken. The Home care
treatment is availed only on a cashless basis, subject to
availability of our empanelled service provider(s).
Kindly visit our website for cities/locations where such
services are available.

f. Treatment availed is not categorized under “AYUSH” or
any form of non- allopathic treatment

g. Suchtreatment cannot be provided on outpatient basis

However in case of unavailability of our empanelled service
provider in the insured person's location, in case the insured
person intends to avail the services of non-network
provider and claims for reimbursement, a prior approval
from Us needs to be taken before availing such services.

In case the insured person breaches the conditions of
approval or fails to take the prior written approval from Us,
we are not liable to settle any claim under this section.

For the purpose of this benefit, Home care treatment shall
include:

a. Diagnostic tests underwent at home as advised by
medical practitioner

b. Medicines prescribed in writing by a medical
practitioner

c. Consultation charges of the medical practitioner
d. Nursing charges if advised by the medical practitioner

Any expenses payable during the Policy period shall not in
aggregate exceed the Annual Sum Insured and additional
sum insured /cumulative bonus (if any) as specified in the.

In Patient AYUSH Hospitalization

We will cover the Medical Expenses incurred in respect of
the Insured Person’s AYUSH Treatment during the Policy
Period up to the Annual Sum Insured specified in the Policy
Schedule provided that:

i. The Medical Expenses incurred are Reasonable and
Customary Charges.

ii; The Insured Person is Hospitalized for AYUSH
Treatment at a AYUSH hospital or an AYUSH Day-care
centre.

iii. The Insured Person’s Hospitalization commences and
continues on the written advice of the treating Medical
Practitioner.

iv. Any Medical Expenses payable during the Policy
period shall not in aggregate exceed the Annual Sum
Insured and additional sum insured /cumulative bonus
(if any) as specified in the Policy Schedule against this
Benefit.

v. This Benefit will be provided on a reimbursement and/
or on cashless basis where ever applicable.

We shall not be liable to pay for any claim under this Benefit
which arises directly or indirectly for or in connection with
any of the following:

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 8 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

10.

11.

i. Pre-hospitalization Medical Expenses or Post-
hospitalization Medical Expenses.

ii. Any expenses incurred for the purpose of evaluation or
investigation.

Domestic road ambulance cover

We will cover the expenses incurred on road ambulance
services which are offered by a healthcare or ambulance
service provider and which have been used during the
Policy Period to transfer the Insured Person to the nearest
Hospital with adequate emergency facilities for the
provision of Emergency Care, provided that:

e Our maximum liability under this Benefit for every
claim arising during the Policy Year will be restricted to
1% of the Annual Sum insured maximum up to
10,000;

e Wehave accepted a claim under “Inpatient treatment”
in respect of the Insured Person for the same
Accident/Illness for which road ambulance services
were availed.

e This Benefit includes and is limited to the cost of the
transportation of the Insured Person:

a) From the place of injury/illness to the nearest
hospital

b) To the nearest Hospital with higher medical
facilities which is prepared to admit the Insured
Person and provide the necessary medical
services if such medical services cannot
satisfactorily be provided at a Hospital where the
Insured Person is situated, and only if that
transportation has been prescribed in writing by a
Medical Practitioner and is for Medically
Necessary Treatment.

c) From a Hospital to the nearest diagnostic centre
during the course of Hospitalization for advanced
diagnostic treatment in circumstances where such
facility is not available in the existing Hospital.

e The ambulance / service provider providing the
services be a registered provider with road traffic
authority.

Any expenses in relation to transportation of the Insured
Person from Hospital to the Insured Person’s residence
while transferring an Insured Person after he/she has been
discharged from the Hospital are not payable under this
Benefit.

Air Ambulance

We will cover the expenses up to the Annual sum insured
incurred on air ambulance services in respect of an Insured
Person which are offered by a healthcare or an air
ambulance service provider and which have been used
during the Policy Period to transfer the Insured Person to
the nearest Hospital with adequate emergency facilities for
the provision of Emergency Care, provided that:

a. Itis fora life threatening emergency health condition/s
of the Insured Person which requires immediate and

12.

13.

rapid ambulance transportation from the place where
the Insured Person is situated at the time of requiring
Emergency Care to a hospital provided that the
transportation is for Medically Necessary Treatment, is
certified in writing by a Medical Practitioner, and road
ambulance services cannot be provided.

b. Such air ambulance providing the services, should be
duly licensed to operate as such by a competent
government Authority.

c. This cover is limited to transportation from the area of
emergency to the nearest Hospital only;

d. Wewillnot cover:
Any transportation from one Hospital to another;

Any transportation of the Insured Person from
Hospital to the Insured Person's residence after
he/she has been discharged from the Hospital

c. Any transportation or air ambulance expenses
incurred outside the geographical scope of India.

e. Wehave accepted a claim under Inpatient treatment in
respect of the Insured Person for the same
Accident/IIlness for which air ambulance services were
availed.

f. Weshallnot be liable if Medically Necessary Treatment
can be provided at the Hospital where the Insured
Person is situated at the time of requiring Emergency
Care.

Base Co-payment

This policy will be subject to 50% base co-payment and
He/She shall be liable to pay 50% of admissible claim
amount of each and every claim. Base Co-payment once
chosen cannot be changed mid-term. Modification of co-
payment may happen only during renewal subject to
underwriting. In case, base co-payment is reduced during
renewal, fresh waiting periods shall be applicable on the
modified portion of base co-payment.

i. Base Co-payment shall be applicable to all benefits
under the policy except any benefits availed under
Care management program, Care management plus
program, preventive health check-up,.

ii, Base Co-payment shall not be applicable in case
voluntary deductible has been opted for.

Cumulative Bonus/ Additional Sum Insured

We will provide a Cumulative Bonus of 10% of the Annual
Sum insured at the end of each Policy Year if the expiring
Policy has been claim free and is continuously renewed
with Us. The Cumulative Bonus will not be accumulated for
more than 100% of the Annual Sum insured under any
circumstances.

i. In case where the policy is on a floater basis the
cumulative bonus will be on floater basis and for
individual policy the same will be on an individual
basis.

ii. In case where the policy is on a floater basis, the
cumulative bonus will be accrued only if no claims have

UIN :

ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 9 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

vi.

vii.

Vili.

been made in respect of all Insured Person(s) in the
expiring policy period.

In a floater policy as specified in the Policy Schedule,
the Cumulative Bonus so accrued during the previous
Policy Year(s) will only be available to those Insured
Person(s) who were insured in previous Policy Year(s)
and continue to be insured with Us in the subsequent
Policy Year(s).

Cumulative Bonus will not be added if the Policy is not
renewed with Us by the end of the Grace Period.

Cumulative bonus can be utilised only when the
Annual Sum Insured is completely exhausted.

If the Policy Period is two or three years, any
Cumulative Bonus that has accrued for the first/second
Policy Year will be credited at the end of the first/second
Policy Year as the case may be and will be available for
any claims made in the subsequent Policy Year.

If the Insured Persons in the expiring policy are covered
on an individual basis as specified in the Policy
Schedule and there is an accumulated Cumulative
Bonus for each Insured Person under the expiring
policy, and such expiring policy has been Renewed
with Us on a floater policy basis as specified in the
Policy Schedule then the Cumulative Bonus to be
carried forward for credit in such Renewed Policy shall
be the lowest among all the Insured Persons.

In case of floater policies where Insured Persons
Renew their expiring policy with Us by splitting the
Annual Sum Insured in to individual policies the
Cumulative Bonus of the expiring policy shall be
apportioned to such Renewed Policies in the
proportion of the Annual Sum Insured of each
Renewed Policy as detailed in table below.

Accumulate
dCumulative
bonus/
Additional
SumlInsured
(after5claim
freeyears)

Annual
Floater Sum
Insured

20 Lac 10 Lac

Floater
policy split

Revised

Insuredof

to individual]each
policies with|individual

Annual Sum
Insured of

10 Lacs each|

policy

AnnualSum

Revised
Accumulated
Cumulative
bonus/
Additional
SumlInsured
ofeach
individual
policy

ix.

If the Annual Sum Insured has been reduced at the time
of Renewal, the applicable Cumulative Bonus shall be
reduced in the same proportion to the Annual Sum
Insured as detailed in table below

Annual Sum |Accumulated Revised Revised

Insured Cumulative Annual Sum |Accumulated
bonus/ Annual Sum Insured Cumulative
Additional Insured bonus/
SumInsured reduced to Additional
(after5claim % 10 Lacs SumlInsured
freeyears)

20 Lac 10 Lac 10 Lac 5 Lac

14.

x. If the Annual Sum Insured under the Policy has been

increased at the time of Renewal the Cumulative Bonus
shall be calculated on the Annual Sum Insured of the
last completed Policy Year.

xi. In the event of a Claim under the Policy during any

subsequent Policy Year, the accrued cumulative bonus
shall not be reduced.

Reset Benefit

We will reset the Annual Sum insured up to 100% of the
Annual Sum insured unlimited times, for all future claims
within the same policy not related to the illness / disease /
injury for which a claim has been paid for the same insured
person in a Policy Year as stated in the Policy Schedule,
provided that:

vi.

vii.

The Annual Sum insured including additional sum
insured /Cumulative Bonus (if any) in respect of the
Insured Person is insufficient as a result of previous
claims paid in that Policy Year.

The total amount of reset will not exceed the Annual
Sum Insured for that policy year.

The Reset Benefit will be applied only if the claim is
made and admissible under “Inpatient Treatment” or
“Daycare Procedure”.

The Reset Benefit will not be triggered for the first claim
made during the Policy Year.

The Reset benefit will be triggered only once and not
unlimited times for all future claims within the same
policy which are related to the illness/disease/injury for
which a claim has already been paid/registered for the
same insured person.

For individual policies, reset Sum Insured will be
available on individual basis whereas for floater
policies, it will be available on floater basis.

For any single claim during a Policy Year , the maximum
claim amount payable shall not exceed the sum of

e TheAnnual Sum insured;

e additional sum insured /Cumulative Bonus;

viii. The Reset Benefit will not be available for an Illness /

Injury or related complications including but not limited
to any relapse within 45 days in respect of which a
claim has been paid in that Policy Year for the same
Insured Person.

Any unutilized Reset Benefit will not be carried forward
to any subsequent Policy Years.

During a Policy Year, the aggregate claim amount
payable, shall not exceed the sum of:

e TheAnnual Sum Insured
e additional sum insured /Cumulative Bonus

e Reset Sum Insured

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 10 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

15. Sub-limits applicable

The expenses payable during the entire policy period for treatment of the following diseases/ conditions (either as a day care or
as an in-patient exceeding 24hrs of admission in the hospital) shall be maximum up to the amount mentioned in the table below;

Annual Sum Insured
Procedures/Medical Conditions/Ailments/Diseases

3L/4L/5L 10L/15L/20L >20L

Treatment of cataract Up to = 25,000/ eye Up to = 50,000/ eye Up to = 75,000/ eye
Treatment of each and every ailment/procedure mentioned below

Treatment of cerebrovascular and cardiovascular disorders
Treatment/surgeries for cancer(including chemo/radio/oral)

= 2,00,000 % 3,50,000 = 5,00,000
Treatment of other renal complications and disorders
Treatment for breakage of long bones/Joint replacements
Robotic surgeries for any ailment/condition/disease = 1,00,000 ~ 1,75,000 = 2,50,000

Sub-limits will include the expenses incurred on pre hospitalisation and post hospitalisation expenses

16. Enhanced Annual Sum insured for Road Traffic Accidents

If the insured person meets with a Road Traffic Accident
resulting in in-patient hospitalization, then the Annual Sum
Insured shall be doubled subject to the following:

17.

It is declared and proven that the insured person was
taking due safety precautions such as use of seat-belt/
helmet/ following road traffic signals and was either
riding as pillion rider in a two wheeler or travelling in a
four wheeler at the time of accident as evidenced by
Police record and Hospital record.

The enhanced (doubled) Sum Insured shall be available
only once during the policy period.

The enhanced (double) Sum Insured shall be available
only after exhaustion of the annual sum insured.

The enhanced Sum Insured can be utilized only for that
particular hospitalization following the Road Traffic
Accident.

Reset benefit shall not trigger for claims under this
cover.

This benefit shall not be applicable for day care
treatment.

The unutilized balance of enhanced (doubled) sum
insured for road traffic accidents cannot be carried
forward for the remaining policy period or for renewal.

Claims under this benefit will reduce the Cumulative
bonus/ additional sum insured

Preventive health check-up

Insured Persons can avail a preventive health check-up as
per our pre- defined package only at our network providers
or empanelled health service providers anytime during the
Policy period subject to the below conditions:

This benefit can be availed only on cashless basis and
is limited to once a year per Insured Person.

This benefit can be availed through our mobile
application or via utilisation of health check-up
coupons provided with the policy kit

The Network Provider /Health Service Provider shall be
assigned by Us post receiving Insured Person’s request
to avail a health check-up under this Benefit.

Utilisation of this preventive health check-up will not
impact the Annual Sum Insured or eligibility for
additional sum insured /cumulative Bonus.

Un-utilised health check-up package will not be carried
forward to the next policy year and it will be the Insured
Person's choice and responsibility to utilise the same
with in the designated policy period. We shall not be
liable to provide any reminders or notifications for the
same.

In-case of long term policies (2 year or 3 years), the
preventive health check-up package for all the policy
years shall be provided together in the first policy year
itself. It shall be the responsibility of the Insured Person
to preserve the same and undergo the check-ups
during the designated policy years.

Please Note:

We shall not hold any responsibility towards any loss
or damage arising out of or in relation to any opinion,
advice, prescription, actual or alleged errors, omissions
and representations made by the Medical Practitioner/
Healthcare professional.

Choosing the services under this Benefit is purely upon
the customer's own discretion and at own risk.

The Insured Person should seek assistance from a
health care professional when interpreting and
applying them to the Insured person’s individual
circumstances. If the Insured person has any concerns
about His/ her health, He/ She may consult His/ her
general practitioner.

18. Incentives associated with Vaccination against
pneumococcal disease

We will provide an additional 2.5% discount on premium
(fresh or renewal) for Insured Person(s) who have taken the
Pneumococcal vaccine or its equivalent vaccine which

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

10

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 11 of D5.pdf ---
helps prevent pneumococcal disease. All the members
covered under thepolicy should have be vaccinated in the
past one year (1 year) from policy start date to avail this
discount. i.e. if policy start date is 1st January 2022, all
insured persons under the policy should have been
vaccinated against Pneumococcal disease in the period
from 1st January 2021 to 31st December 2021. This
discount shall be provided lifetime as long as the insured
person continues to renew this policy.

Mandatory Extension:

19. Care Management Program

In consideration of payment of additional premium, the
insured person can avail benefits of the Care Management
Program. The Care Management Program aims to provide
solutions which will solve everyday challenges/issues
faced by You, promote holistic wellbeing and empower You
to lead independent and enriching lives.

Our Care management program focusses on providing You
with assistance and support in case of any challenge but at
the same time equipping you for the future. Our endeavour
is to promote longevity, productivity and incentivise You for
your healthy behaviour which will enable dignified living.

The Insured Person shall have access to a host of benefits
under the Care management program on downloading and
registering on our mobile application. This activity is to
ensure adequate utilization of services offered and to
redeem the wellbeing points awarded.

1. Tele Consultation(s)

We will arrange consultations and recommendations
for routine health issues by a qualified Medical
Practitioner or health care professional. For the
purpose of this benefit Telephonic/Virtual consultation
shall mean consultation provided by a qualified
Medical Practitioner or Health care professional
through various mode of communication like audio,
video, online portal, chat or mobile application. The
services provided under this Benefit will be made
available subject to the terms and conditions, and in
the manner prescribed below:

e The Medical Practitioner may suggest /
recommend / prescribe over the counter
medications based on the information provided, if
required on a case to case basis. However, the
services under this Benefit should not be construed
to constitute medical advice and/or substitute the
Insured Person's visit/ consultation to an
independent Medical Practitioner/Healthcare
professional*.

e There shall be no maximum limit on the count of
tele-consultations that can be availed by the
Insured Personina policy year.

e This service will be available 24 hours a day, and
365 daysinayear.

e We/Medical Practitioner/Healthcare professional
may refer the Insured Person to another specialist
or a general physician (outside of our empanelled
network), if required and the charges for such

Golden Shield

specialist or a general physician will have to be
borne by the Insured Person.

e We shall not be liable for any discrepancy in the
information provided under this Benefit.

e Choosing the services under this Benefit is purely
upon the customer’s own discretion and at own risk.

e *The proposer should seek assistance from a
health care professional when interpreting and
applying them to the Insured person’s individual
circumstances. If the Insured person has any
concerns about His/ her health, He/ She may
consult His/ her general practitioner. We shall not
hold any responsibility towards any loss or
damage arising out of or in relation to any opinion,
advice, prescription, actual or alleged errors,
omissions and representations made by the
Medical Practitioner/ Healthcare professional.

2. Second E-opinion for Critical Illness

We shall arrange E-opinion on a cashless basis from
our empanelled Medical Practitioners in case the
Insured Person is diagnosed with any of the below
listed critical Illnesses during the Policy Period, and at
his/her sole discretion chooses to avail an E-opinion
subject to the below mentioned conditions.

e The E-opinion will be arranged on cashless basis
and the insured person will not have to bear any
expenses on the same.

e The E-opinion will be based only on the
information and documentation provided to Us
(which will be shared with the Medical
Practitioner) and it should not be construed to
constitute medical advice and/or substitute the
Insured Person's visit/ consultation to an
independent Medical Practitioner/Healthcare
professional.

e This E-opinion can be availed only once during the
Policy Period forthe sameillness.

e Appointments to avail this E-opinion may be
requested through Our Website or Our mobile
application or through calling Our call centre on
Our toll free number.

e The E-opinion provided under this Benefit shall be
limited to the listed critical Illnesses and will not be
valid for any medico legal purposes.

e Wedonot assume any liability towards any loss or
damage arising out of or in relation to any opinion,
advice, prescription, actual or alleged errors,
omissions and representations made by the
Medical Practitioner.

List of Critical Illness for which Second E-opinion may be
requested

Heart and vascular conditions
1. Myocardial Infarction
2. Refractory heart failure

3. Cardiomyopathy

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

11

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 12 of D5.pdf ---
Lung Conditions

4. Endstagelung Failure

5. Primary(Idiopathic) pulmonary Hypertension
Liver conditions

6. Endstageliver Failure

Neuro/ spinal & psychiatric disease

7. Multiple sclerosis with Persisting symptoms
8. Motorneuron disease with Permanent symptoms
9. Permanent paralysis of limbs

10. Stroke resulting in permanent symptoms

11. Coma of specified severity

12. Alzheimer’s Disease before age of 50 years
13. Parkinson’s disease before age of 50 years
14. Apallic syndrome

15. Benign brain tumour

16. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)

17. Major head trauma

Renal diseases

18. Kidney failure requiring regular dialysis

19. Medullary cystic disease

Musculoskeletal diseases

20. Muscular dystrophy

21. Poliomyelitis

Bleeding disorders

22. Aplastic Anaemia

Auto immune diseases

23. Systemic Lupus Erythematous with renal involvement
24. Myasthenia gravis

25. Scleroderma

26. Good pastures syndrome with lung or renal
involvement

27. Blindness

28. Deafness

29. Cancer of specified severity

30. Third Degree Burns

31. Loss of speech

32. Loss of limbs

33. Loss of Independent Existence

3. Dietand Nutrition e-consultation

We will offer You diet and nutrition e-consultation on a
virtual platform via our mobile application to help you
achieve your weight and health management goals.

Maximum of 12 sessions will be provided per insured
person per policy period.

The e-consultation shall be availed only through virtual
modes of chat via our mobile application.

Golden Shield

E-Counselling

We will offer e-counselling session(s) with a
Psychologist via our mobile application for providing
assistance in dealing with issues such as but not
limited to personal and lifestyle imbalance, anxiety,
depression, sleep disorders, stress and problems
related to psychological/mental illness/ psychiatric and
psychosomatic disorders.

Maximum of 12 sessions will be provided per insured
person per policy period.

The e-counseling sessions shall be availed only
through virtual modes of chat via our mobile
application.

Health Management Program

The Health Management Program has been designed
to ensure a regular monitoring of the Insured Person’s
health and timely intervention and a concrete plan for
corrective measures in case of any decline in the health
status of the Insured Person.

The Health Coach shall guide and motivate the Insured
Person to follow the customised Health management
program designed for them to achieve their health and
fitness goals.

As a part of the Health Management Program, the
insured person can avail the following benefits

a. Care Calls

Allinsured persons shall receive care calls to check
up on their well-being and safety by our health
coach who understand the issues surrounding
senior individuals. The insured person(s) will be
encouraged to express their concerns surrounding
their well-being (if any) on these calls so that the
health coach can address them later.

b. Goal based incentives on outcome of Preventive
health check-up

Monitoring of one’s health status remains an
important step towards becoming more self-
aware of one’s medical/health conditions.

The insured person shall be subjected to a mid-
term assessment via a Wellbeing Risk Assessment
[WRA] which will include outcome of certain
laboratory tests and questionnaire based
assessment covering aspects of lifestyle, current
medical history & family history.

The assessment will be carried out using a
telephonic/ digital connect with the Health Coach.

The health coach will encourage the insured
person to undergo certain laboratory tests (as
detailed in Table A) and we will incentivise the
Insured Person in case of favourable findings of the
laboratory tests.

The insured person will have to undergo the below
mentioned laboratory tests as a part of the mid-
term assessment from our empanelled diagnostic

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223 12

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 13 of D5.pdf ---
centres and will be guided by the health coach for
thesame.

In case the insured person is desirous of
undergoing laboratory tests at a diagnostic centre
of their choice which is not empanelled with us, the
insured person will have to bear the charges
associated with the actual costs of the mid-term
assessment diagnostic tests/ visit charges /
collection charges etc.

The insured person will also have to provide us
with the laboratory reports of the below
mentioned medical tests/investigations conducted
within the policy period for Us to award the
wellness points.

Table A

Medical Tests Favorable | Findings thatneed

findings improvement

Glycosylated <6% >6 and upto7%
Haemoglobin (HbA1c)

Low Density < 100 mg/dl >100 and<or

Lipoprotein (LDL) = 190 mg/dl

High Density >or=40 mg/dl > 20 mg/dl and

Lipoprotein (HDL) <40 mg/dl

Serum cholesterol <or=200mg/dl >200 and<or

=300 mg/dl

Serum Triglycerides <or= 150 mg/dl >150and<

= 250mg/dl

S. Creatinine <or=1.3 mg/dl >1.3 mg/dl

The insured person shall be awarded wellness points as per table
B for each laboratory test mentioned below in case the findings of
the laboratory test are favourable as detailed in Table A.

Table B

Medical Tests Wellness points awarded in

case of favourable findings
Glycosylated Haemoglobin (HbA 1c) 500
Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL) 200
High Density Lipoprotein (HDL) 200
Serum cholesterol 200
Serum Triglycerides 200
Serum Creatinine 200
Total 1500

The maximum wellness points that can be awarded under
this activity is restricted to 1500 wellness points per insured
person per policy year.

Each wellness point will be valued at INR 0.20. Wellness
points so earned can be redeemed against deals and
discounts on purchase of medicines from our empanelled
pharmacies or undergoing recommended diagnostic tests
from our empanelled diagnostic centres etc. as listed on our
mobile application.

Participation in Yoga/Meditation Sessions/ Completion of
Targeted Steps

The Insured Person can earn wellness points by
participating in yoga sessions or meditation sessions
aimed at maintaining physical and mental Wellness.
Participation and successful completion of 10 yoga/
meditation sessions in a month will award the insured

Golden Shield

person 250 wellness points. Each yoga session/ meditation
session must last 30 minutes or more and the maximum
wellness points that can be accrued under this task is 1500
per insured person per policy year.

Please Note: The insured persons can join a virtual
yoga/meditation class or visit an actual yoga/meditation
centre. The expenses associated with the class
fees/membership fees/tutor or instructor fees etc. will
have to be borne by the insured person. Proof of payment
of fees and certificate of completion of sessions will have
to be provided to us in order for insured person to earn the
wellness points.

Alternately, in case the Insured Person is keen to achieve
targeted steps instead of participation in yoga
sessions/meditation sessions, we will award 250 wellness
points per month provided the insured person takes 4000+
steps per day for atleast 15 days ina month. The maximum
wellness points that can be accrued by achieving targeted
steps is 1500 per insured person per policy year.

Our mobile application will have to be downloaded within
30 days of the policy start date to avail the benefit as the
average step count completed by an Insured person would
be monitored on this mobile application.

Each wellness point will be valued at INR 0.20. Wellness
points so earned can be redeemed against any services
under discounts as mentioned in “discounts on services or
products” on our mobile application.

Wellness points
accumulated

Maximum wellness Rupee Value
points awarded per jof Accumulated
person per policy year | wellness points
1500 300

Outcome of
Preventive health
check-ups

Participation in Yoga/ 1500 300
Meditation / Completion

of Targeted steps

Total
Medical Vault

3000 600

The insured person can upload His/Her health records in
our mobile application so as to protect them from loss or
theft. These health records can then be viewed as per need
and convenience of the insured person.

By availing this service, the Insured person agrees and has
no objection to the health records being maintained with Us
for internal use only.

Health Assistance (HAT)

HAT shall assist the Insured Person in understanding their
health condition better by providing answers to any queries
related to health service providers

The services provided under this shall include:

e Identifying a Physician/ Specialist

e Availability of hospital beds/COVID hubs etc.

e Providing guidance on engaging attendants or nurses

e Facilitation with respect to arrangement of mobility
aids, daily living aids, medical equipment etc.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

13

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 14 of D5.pdf ---
e Scheduling an appointment with any Medical
Practitioner empanelled with Us

e Scheduling appointments for a second opinion

e Providing suitable options with respect to Hospitals as
well as providing assistance in Cashless facility,
wherever applicable.

e Scheduling appointments from diagnostic labs
empanelled with us.

e Providing information, assistance and_ facilitation on
door step delivery of medicines

e Providing preventive information on ailments

e Providing guidance on post Hospitalization care, such
as Physiotherapy/ Nursing at home.

Please note that services provided under this Benefit are
solely for assistance, and should not be construed to be a
substitute for a visit/ consultation to an independent
Medical Practitioner. Our role is limited to that of facilitation
and Health Assistance services will not include the charges
for any independent Medical Practitioner/nutritionist/
charges incurred on diagnostics/ consulted on HAT’s
recommendation, and such charges are to be borne by the
Insured Person.

For all facilitation services provided under this cover, our
role shall be limited to assistance only and the charges and
expenses associated with the actual service shall have to
be borne by the insured person.

This service is available on our mobile application or by
calling on 040-66274205 (please note that this number is
subject to change) from 8am to 8pm from Monday to
Saturday except public holidays.
By availing this service, the Insured person agrees and has
no objection to the health records being maintained with Us
for internal use only.
While deciding to obtain the above services, the Insured
person(s) expressly notes and agrees that it is entirely for
them to decide whether to obtain these services and also to
decide the use (if any) to which these services are to be put
for.
Ambulance Assistance
We will facilitate ground medical transportation by a
Service provider to transport the Insured Person to the
nearest Hospital or any clinic or nursing home for medically
necessary treatment subject to availability of services in
that particular city/ location. Kindly visit our website for
updated list of cities/ locations where the services are
provided.
1. The services under this Benefit are subject to the
following conditions:

e The medical transportation is for a life threatening
health condition of the Insured Person which
requires immediate and rapid transportation to the
Hospital; as certified in writing by the Medical
practitioner

e The Insured Person is in India and the treatment is
in India only;

Golden Shield

e The ambulance service is availed within the same
city

e This is an assistance service and the expenses for
the same will have to be borne by the insured
person or can be claimed under domestic road
ambulance cover( if inpatient treatment claim is
found to be admissible)

Process to avail Ambulance Assistance:

a) On calling Our helpline number provided below, Our
trained customer service executive (CSE) will ask the
Insured person relevant questions to assess the
situation.

b) The call may be redirected to a qualified Medical
Practitioner in order to evaluate the requirement for an
ambulance with Advanced Life Support based on the
Insured Person’s condition.

c) The below mentioned details are to be made available

for availing the services:

1. UHID of Insured Person, as provided on the Health

Card.

2. Contact number of the Insured Person

3. Location of Insured Person
How to Call an Ambulance? (Via Call)

Call 18001028136
to reach the
Emergency

Response Centre

Doctor may
accompany patient
in the ambulance
if required

Click on emergency
icon & place request

Customer service
executive connects
with medical team

Doctor understand
situation & advices
on emergency Care
/ Selection of
ambulance

An |VRS will ask
you to select option
lor 2 depending on
requirement.
Dial 1 for Medical
Ambulance
Services

Patient will be
taken to the nearest
hospital as per the
predefined hospital
network chart

Ambulance
pickup &drop
the patient to

hospital / health
facility

XY

The medical team
provides with
continued
necessary
assistance on call

NY

CSE dispatch the
ambulance to
desired location &
provide necessary
details

a,

Call will be
answered by an
CSE & details like

name, UHID, nature
of emergency will
be asked

Emergency
Ambulance

Transport
will arrive

CSE does
feedback Call

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

14

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 15 of D5.pdf ---
a
Golden Shield

10. Discounts on services / products

We shall only facilitate the Insured Person in availing
discounts on services/ products including but not limited to
investigations/ diagnostic tests/ laboratory tests / health
supplements/ medical equipment/ homecare services /
virtual health & wellness sessions/ AYUSH products /
Fitness & wellness related activities & products etc. at our
empanelled diagnostic centres, drugs / medicines ordered

advice or information obtained by way of the wellness
program or any actions chosen by the Insured Person
onthe basis of such advice or information.

e The care management program offered is subject to
revisions based on the insurance regulatory
framework from time to time.

Optional Covers

from pharmacies etc. offered by our network providers/ 1. Claim Protector

health service providers. These discounts can be viewed on In consideration of payment of additional premium to Us,

our mobile application and one can redeem the wellness the insured person can avail the benefit as mentioned

points earned from Care Management Program (either under claim protector. If a claim has been accepted under
through favourable findings on health check-up or the inpatient hospitalization cover, then the items which
participation in Yoga/ meditations sessions/ achieving are not payable under the claim as per the List of Excluded
targeted steps per month) for availing discounts as per items released by IRDAI that is related to the particular
productterms and conditions and subject to availability. claim will become payable. The maximum claim pay-out
Terms and Conditions for Care Management Program under this benefit shall be limited to Annual Sum Insured
d licy.

e There shall be no minimum wellness points limit for under your polcy.
redemption against health related deals and discounts Base Co-payment as opted by the Insured Person in the
offered on our mobile application. policy shall be applicable for this cover

e The lnsured Person(s) can choose to carry forwardthe = 2.__- Modification of Base Co-payment
wellness points for 3 years, in case they do not wish to In consideration of payment of additional premium to Us,
redeem the same provided the policy is continuously The insured person will have the option to reduce his base
renewed without any break. The wellness points so co-payment from 50% to 40% or 30% or 20% and He/She
accrued shall have to be redeemed at the end of the 3rd shall be liable to pay the percentage (%) of admissible claim
Policy year. amount of each and every claim.

e The Insured Person shall notify Us and submit the Base Co-payment once chosen cannot be changed mid-
relevant documents, reports, receipts as and when term. Modification of co-payment may happen only
required by us within 60 days of undertaking any during renewal subject to underwriting. In case, base co-
activity for us to reward appropriate wellness points. payment is reduced during renewal, fresh waiting periods

e In case of expiry of policy and the policy not being shall be applicable on the modified portion of base co-
renewed, the accrued wellness points may be carried payment.
forward for a period not exceeding three months. 3. Voluntary Deductible

e There shall not be any cash reimbursement or
redemption available against the wellness points
accumulated by an Insured Person.

e We or Our Health Service Providers or Our Network
Providers do not warrant the validity, accuracy,
completeness, safety, quality, or applicability of the
content or anything said or written or any suggestions
provided in the course of providing the wellbeing
services.

e We do not accept any liability towards quality of the
services made available by our network providers/
health service providers and are not liable for any
defects or deficiencies on their part.

e Availability of all Services under the care management
program is subject to availability of Health Service
provider at the requested location.

e We, Our group entities, or affiliates, their respective
directors, officers, employees, agents, vendors, shall
not be responsible for or liable for, any actions, claims,
demands, losses, damages, costs, charges and
expenses which an Insured Person may claim to have
suffered, sustained or incurred, as a result of any

In case the Insured person has opted for a voluntary
deductible, as specified in the Policy Schedule, the
Deductible will be applicable on aggregate basis for all
Hospitalization expenses during the Policy Year before it
becomes payable by Us, subject to terms, conditions and
exclusions of the Policy. The voluntary deductible option
available will be 20% of Annual Sum Insured opted by
You.

i. In case voluntary deductible has been opted for, base
co-payment shall not be chosen. Zone based co-
payment shall be applicable in case medically
necessary treatment (Except medically necessary
treatment for road traffic accidents) has been taken in
a zone higher (Zone A being the highest followed by
Zone B and then Zone C) than the zone for which
premium has been paid on issuance of the policy.

ii. The deductible will apply on individual basis in case of
individual policy and on floater basis in case of floater
policy.

iii. Deductible once chosen cannot be changed mid-term.
Modification of deductible may happen only during
renewal subject to underwriting.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

15

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 16 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

4. Caremanagement Plus Program

In consideration of payment of additional premium, Insured
Person can avail the benefits associated with care
management Plus Program as detailed below

1.

Health Care Professional

All insured persons shall be assigned a dedicated
Health Care Professional who will act as a first point of
contact for any service need. The Health Care
professional will be a certified nutritionist who will
assist the Insured person(s) with a personalised diet
depending on their health concerns. The Health Care
Professional shall encourage and promote optimal
health and assist on matters pertaining to fitness, diet
and nutrition and wellbeing concerns faced by the
insured persons. He/She will encourage two way
communication, provide reminders on healthy habits
and reassure the insured person in times of need.

The health care professional will also play a significant
role in being the primary point of contact to the Insured
Person. The Health Care professional will

e On-board the Insured Person on to our mobile
application

e Educate the Insured Person on the pertinent
features of our mobile application such as but not
limited to availing Tele-consultations, utilising the
preventive health check-up, conducting the mid-
term assessment, educating about health
assistance services, redemption of wellness points
etc.

e Give care calls to the Insured Person to understand
insured person’s issues surrounding fitness, diet &
nutrition and wellbeing issues if any and propose
solutions forthe same

Update to family members-

As a part of the enhanced wellness features, your
family members will be regularly updated about your
health and adherence to prescribed diet(as prescribed
under the diet and nutrition e-consultation benefit
under Care management program) via messaging
platform(s) so that they can motivate and encourage
and participate in your efforts to achieve your
healthcare goals.

The above update shall be provided only on Your
consent and after You provide us with contact details of
family member who wishes to receive timely updates
about your health and diet regime.

Out-patient consultations

We shall cover the Medical Expenses incurred during
the Policy period for out-patient consultations from a
General Medical Practitioner or Specialist Medical
Practitioner or Super Specialist Medical practitioner or
AYUSH medical practitioner in relation to any Illness
contracted or Injury suffered by the Insured Person
during the Policy period subject to the overall
maximum number of 4 consultations in a Policy Year.

These services shall be provided through our
Empanelled Health Service Provider subject to
availability at the time of appointment.

This benefit shall also include e-consultation given by a
General Medical Practitioner or Specialist or Super
Specialist Medical Practitioner or AYUSH medical
practitioner through a virtual mode of communication
such as but not limited to chat, email, video, online
portal, or mobile application.

Physiotherapy sessions shall be excluded from the
scope of this benefit.

Counselling availed for psychiatric ailments or mental
health issues shall be excluded from the scope of this
benefit but it shall be covered in E-Counseling (section
d. Base Cover. 18.4) as per the section d. Benefits
covered under the policy.

Routine Diagnostics and Minor Procedure cover

We shall cover medical expenses incurred for
outpatient diagnostic tests recommended by Medical
Practitioner under our cashless network available in
the mobile application in relation to any Illness
contracted or Injury suffered by the Insured Person
during the Policy Period and for listed minor procedures
undergone at a general practitioner or specialist /
super-specialist medical practitioner by the Insured
Person during the Policy period maximum up & 2,000.

These services shall be provided through our
Empanelled Health Service Provider subject to
availability at the time of appointment. The diagnostic
tests shall include but will not be limited to
histopathology, biochemistry, hematology,
immunology, microbiology, serology, pathology,
radiology, ultrasound and TMT. Genetic studies shall be
excluded from the scope of this cover.

We may even arrange for diagnostic tests to be carried
out at the location of the Insured Person provided such
location is within the geographical reach of the Health
Service Provider on the date of the request. This service
shall be subject to availability of Our empanelled
Health Service provider.

List of Minor Procedures covered under this benefit #

Sr. No.} Procedure

1 Drainage of abscess

2 Injection including Intramuscular
(Per Injection cost)
Intravenous injection(IV)
Sprain Management
(Joint movement/ exercise)

5 Otoscopic examination
(Magnifying otoscopy)

6 Nasal packing for control of haemorrhage
Nebulizer therapy

8 Removal of foreign body

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

16

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 17 of D5.pdf ---
List of Minor Procedures covered under this benefit #

Sr.No.| Procedure
9 Suturing (Staple under LA)

10 Removal of suture

11 Stabilization of joint

12 Syringing ear to remove wax

13 Application or removal of plaster cast

14 Laryngoscopy

15 Minor wound management

“this includes only the cost of administration. The
actual cost of consumables shall be covered under the
pharmacy cover. However, the said cost will have to be
borne by the insured person in case the annual sum
insured under the pharmacy cover has been exhausted
or is out of scope of the Pharmacy cover or in case the
consumable is a non-payable item.

Pharmacy cover

We shall cover medical expenses incurred on purchase
of medicines, drugs, and medical consumables, as
prescribed by a Medical Practitioner under our
cashless network available in the mobile application
for any Illness contracted or Injury suffered by the
Insured Person during the Policy Period, maximum up
to % 2,000 through our Empanelled Health Service
Provider subject to availability on the date of the
request.

Health supplements, Nutraceuticals, foods for special
dietary use, foods for special medical purpose, foods
with added probiotics and/or foods with added
prebiotics, vaccinations, vitamins, tonics or other
related products are excluded from the scope of this
cover.

Nursing at Home

We shall cover the expenses incurred by You, up to
% 2,000 for each day up to a maximum of 15 days post
Hospitalization for the medical services of a Qualified
Nurse at Your residence, provided that the nurse is
employed in a Hospital and the engagement of such
Qualified Nurse is certified as necessary by a Medical
Practitioner and related directly to any Illness or Injury,
covered under the Policy. The payment under this cover
is subject to admissibility of Your In-patient treatment
Claim under the Policy.

Exclusions

We will not be liable for any Voluntary Deductible
amount, if applicable and as specifically defined in the
Policy Schedule under the Policy.

We will not be liable to make any payment under this
Policy in connection with or in respect of any expenses
whatsoever incurred in connection with or in respect of:

Golden Shield

Standard exclusions (Exclusions for which
standard wordings are specified by IRDAI)

1. Code-Excl01: Pre-Existing Diseases

ad.

Expenses related to the treatment of a
pre-existing Disease (PED) and its direct
complications shall be excluded until the
expiry of 24 months of continuous
coverage after the date of inception of the
first policy with insurer.

In case of enhancement of sum insured the
exclusion shall apply afresh to the extent
of sum insured increase.

If the Insured Person is continuously
covered without any break as defined
under the portability norms of the extant
IRDAI (Health Insurance) Regulations,
then waiting period for the same would be
reduced to the extent of prior coverage.

Coverage under the policy after the expiry
of 24 months for any pre-existing disease
is subject to the same being declared at
the time of application and accepted by
Insurer.

2. Code- Excl02: Specified disease/procedure
waiting period

a.

Expenses related to the treatment of the
listed Conditions, surgeries/treatments
shall be excluded until the expiry of 24
months of continuous coverage after the
date of inception of the first policy with us.
This exclusion shall not be applicable for
claims arising due to an accident.

In case of enhancement of sum insured the
exclusion shall apply afresh to the extent
of sum insured increase.

If any of the specified disease/procedure
falls under the waiting period specified for
pre-Existing diseases, then the longer of
the two waiting periods shall apply.

The waiting period for listed conditions
shall apply even if contracted after the
policy or declared and accepted without a
specific exclusion.

If the Insured Person is continuously
covered without any break as defined
under the applicable norms on portability
stipulated by IRDAI, then waiting period
for the same would be reduced to the
extent of prior coverage.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

17

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 18 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

f.

List of specific Illness and Surgical Procedures as mention below:

Sr.
No.

Organ /Organ
System

ENT

IIIness/ diagnosis
(irrespective of treatments medical or surgical)

Deviated Nasal Septum

Surgeries/ Procedures (irrespective of any
illness or diagnosis other than cancers)

Septoplasty

CSOM-Chronic Suppurative Otitis Media

Mastoidectomy

Tympanoplasty, Myringotomy &
Myringoplasty
Any treatment for conditions related to

tonsils, adenoids, sinuses, Turbinates/
concha

Gynaecological

Orthopaedic

Gastrointestinal

Fibroids (fibromyoma)
Endometriosis, Cervicitis

Uterine Prolapse

Dysfunctional uterine bleeding
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS)
Arthritis

Gout and Rheumatism

Spinal and Vertebral Disorders including diagnosis as low back ache
Arthroscopy

Stones in gall bladder & Biliary System, cholecystitis, acalculous
cholecystitis

Dilatation and curettage (D&C)
Myomectomy

Hysterectomy (unless due to malignancy

Surgeries for joint replacements

Repairs/ reconstruction of ligaments/
meniscus/ tendons

Spinal & Vertebral Surgeries

Cholecystectomy, Procedures for biliary
stones

Fissure/fistula in anus, hemorrhoids, pilonidal sinus

Endoscopy

Esophageal Varices & Gastric Varices
All types Hernia

Gastrointestinal ulcers including Gastritis & Duodenitis/ Erosions
of gastrointestinal tract

Procedures for Esophageal Varices &
Gastric Varices

All forms of Liver cirrhosis

Endoscopy

Uro-genital

Eye

Stones in Urinary system

Benign Hyperplasia of prostate

Chronic Renal Failure or end stage Renal Failure or chronic
kidney disease including dialysis

Hydrocele, varicocele/ rectocele/ Spermatocele
Cataract
Retinal detachment

Glaucoma

Usage of intra vitreal injections including but not limited to avastin
&lucentis

Surgeries and procedures related to
Stones in Urinary system

Prostatic Surgeries

Dialysis but not limited to haemodialysis &
peritoneal dialysis

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

18

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 19 of D5.pdf ---
a
Golden Shield

f.  Listof specific Illness and Surgical Procedures as mention below: (Contd.)

Surgeries/ Procedures (irrespective of any
illness or diagnosis other than cancers)

IIIness/ diagnosis
(irrespective of treatments medical or surgical)

Sr. | Organ /Organ
No. System

Other General Allinternal/ external tumors, cysts, nodules, polyps, sinus, fistula

conditions

(Applicable to Varicose veins & Varicose ulcers
all organ
systems/
organs/
disciplines
whether or not
described

above)

Parkinson's disease/Alzheimer’s disease

3. a. Expenses related to the treatment of the below Expenses related to any admission primarily for
mentioned illness within 90 days from the first policy enforced bed rest and not for receiving treatment. This
commencement date shall be excluded unless they also includes:
are pre-existing and disclosed at the time of a. Custodial care either at home or in a nursing facility
underwriting for personal care such as help with activities of
i. Hypertension daily living such as bathing, dressing, moving
ii. Diabetes around either by skilled nurses or assistant or non-
. . . skilled persons.

iii. Cardiac Conditions
; ; . b. Any services for people who are terminally ill to
b. This exclusion shall not, however, apply if the Insured . . . .
; address physical, social, emotional and spiritual
Person has continuous coverage for more than twelve needs
months.
. oo . iii. Code-Excl06: Obesity/ Weight Control
c. The within referred waiting period is made applicable

to the enhanced sum insured in the event of granting
higher sum insured subsequently.

4. Code-Excl03: 30-day waiting period

Expenses related to the surgical treatment of
obesity that does not fulfil all the below conditions:

1. Surgery to be conducted is upon the advice of
the Doctor

a. Expenses related to the treatment of any illness within
30 days from the first policy commencement date shall 2, The surgery/Procedure conducted should be
be excluded except claims arising due to an accident, supported by clinical protocols
provided the same are covered. 3. The member has to be 18 years of age or older
b. This exclusion shall not, however, apply if the Insured and
Person has Continuous Coverage for more than twelve 4. Body Mass Index (BMI);
months. a. greaterthan or equal to 40 or
c. The within referred waiting period is made applicable

to the enhanced sum insured in the event of granting
higher sum insured subsequently

Unless covered by way of an appropriate extensions /
optional covers, We shall not be liable to make any
payment under this Policy in connection with or in
respect of

5. Permanent Exclusions

Code- Excl04: Investigation & Evaluation

a. Expenses related to any admission primarily for
diagnostics and evaluation purposes only are
excluded.

b. Any diagnostic expenses which are not related or
not incidental to the current diagnosis and
treatment are excluded.

Code - ExclO5: Exclusion Name: Rest Cure,
rehabilitation and respite care-

b. greater than or equal to 35 in conjunction
with any of the following severe co-
morbidities following failure of less
invasive methods of weight loss:

i. Obesity-related cardiomyopathy
ii. Coronary heart disease
iii. Severe Sleep Apnea

iv. Uncontrolled Type2 Diabetes

iv. Code-Excl07: Change of Gender treatments

Expenses related to any treatment, including surgical
management, to change characteristics of the body to
those of the opposite sex.

Code- Excl08: Cosmetic or plastic Surgery

Expenses for cosmetic or plastic surgery or any
treatment to change appearance unless for
reconstruction following an Accident, Burn(s) or

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

19

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 20 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

vi.

vii.

viii.

xi.

xii.

xiii.

xiv.

Cancer or as part of medically necessary treatment to
remove a direct and immediate health risk to the
insured. For this to be considered a medical necessity, it
must be certified by the attending Medical Practitioner.

Code- Excl09: Hazardous or Adventure sports

Expenses related to any treatment necessitated due to
participation as a professional in hazardous or
adventure sports, including but not limited to, para-
jumping, rock climbing, mountaineering, rafting, motor
racing, horse racing or scuba diving, hand gliding, sky
diving, deep-sea diving.

Code- Excl10: Breach of law

Expenses for treatment directly arising from or
consequent upon any Insured Person committing or
attempting to commit a breach of law with criminal
intent.

Code- Excl11: Excluded Providers

Expenses incurred towards treatment in any hospital or
by any Medical Practitioner or any other provider
specifically excluded by the Insurer and disclosed in its
website / notified to the policyholders are not admissible.
However, in case of life threatening situations or
following an accident, expenses up to the stage of
stabilization are payable but not the complete claim

Code- Excl12: Treatment for, Alcoholism, drug or
substance abuse or any addictive condition and
consequences thereof.

Code- Excl13: Treatments received in heath
hydros, nature cure clinics, spas _ or similar
establishments or private beds registered as a nursing
home attached to such establishments or where
admission is arranged wholly or partly for domestic
reasons.

Code- Excl14: Dietary supplements and substances that
can be purchased without prescription, including but
not limited to Vitamins, minerals and organic
substances unless prescribed by a medical practitioner
as part of hospitalization claim or day care procedure.

Code- Excl15: Expenses related to the treatment for
correction of eye sight due to refractive error less than
7.5 dioptres

Code- Excl16: Unproven Treatments: Expenses
related to any unproven treatment, services and
supplies for or in connection with any treatment.
Unproven treatments are treatments, procedures or
supplies that lack significant medical documentation
to support their effectiveness.

Code- Excl17: Sterility and Infertility: Expenses related
to sterility and infertility. This includes:

i. Anytype of contraception, sterilization

ii. Assisted Reproduction services including artificial
insemination and advanced reproductive
technologies such as IVF, ZIFT, GIFT, ICSI

iii. Gestational Surrogacy

iv. Reversal of sterilization

xv. Code- Excl18: Maternity: Medical treatment expenses

traceable to childbirth (including complicated
deliveries and caesarean sections incurred during
hospitalization) except ectopic pregnancy. Expenses
towards miscarriage (unless due to an accident) and
lawful medical termination of pregnancy during the
policy period

Specific exclusions (Exclusions other than those
mentioned under e.i. above)

6. Any ailment/ illness/ injury/ condition or treatment
or service that is specifically excluded in the Policy
Schedule under Special Conditions

7. Any expenses incurred on prosthesis, corrective
devices, external durable medical equipment of
any kind, instruments used in treatment of sleep
apnoea syndrome or cost of cochlear implant(s)
unless necessitated by an Accident or required
intra-operatively.

8. Multifocal Lens and ambulatory devices such as
walkers, crutches, splints, stockings of any kind
and also any medical equipment which is
subsequently used at home.

9. Expenses incurred on dental treatment unless
necessitated due to an Accident

10. Personal comfort, cosmetics, convenience and
hygiene related items and services

11. Acupressure, acupuncture, magnetic and other
therapies

12. Circumcision unless necessary for treatment of an
Illness or necessitated due to an Accident.

13. Expenses for venereal disease or any sexually
transmitted disease (except HIV/AIDS)

14. Any Treatment or medical services taken outside
the geographical boundaries of India.

15. Any expenses incurred on out-patient (OPD)
treatment. (This exclusion shall not be applicable
in case care management plus program has been
opted for by payment of additional premium)

16. Intentional self-injury (whether arising from an
attempt to commit suicide or otherwise)

17. Any injury or illness caused by or arising from or
attributed to war, invasion, acts of foreign
enemies, hostilities (whether war be declared or
not), civil war, commotion, unrest, rebellion,
revolution, military or usurped power or
confiscation or nationalisation or requisition of or
damage by or under the order of any government
or public local authority

18. Any Illness or Injury caused by or contributed to by
nuclear weapons/materials or contributed to by or
arising from ionising radiation or contamination by
radioactivity by any nuclear fuel or from any nuclear
waste or from the combustion of nuclear fuel

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

20

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 21 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

19. Treatment for any condition / illness which requires

hormone replacement therapy.

20. Artificial life maintenance for the Insured Person

who has been declared brain dead or in vegetative
state as demonstrated by:

a. Deep coma and unresponsiveness to all forms
of stimulation; or

b. Absent pupillary light reaction; or

c. Absent oculo-vestibular and corneal reflexes;
or

d. Complete apnea.

e. General Terms and Clauses

i. Standard General Terms and Clauses (General Terms
and clauses whose wordings are specified by IRDAI)

1.

Disclosure of Information

The Policy shall be void and all premium paid
thereon shall be forfeited to the Company in the
event of misrepresentation, mis-description or
non-disclosure of any material fact by the
policyholder

(Explanation: "Material facts" for the purpose of
this policy shall mean all relevant information
sought by the company in the proposal form and
other connected documents to enable it to take
informed decision in the context of underwriting
the risk)

Condition Precedent to Admission of Liability

Theterms and conditions of the policy must be fulfilled
by the insured person for the Company to make any
payment for claim(s) arising under the policy.

Claim Settlement (provision for Penal Interest)

|. The Company shall settle or reject a claim, as
the case may be, within 30 days from the date
of receipt of last necessary document.

ll. In the case of delay in the payment of a claim,
the Company shall be liable to pay interest to
the policyholder from the date of receipt of last
necessary document to the date of payment of
claim at a rate 2% above the bank rate.

lll. However, where the circumstances of a claim
warrant an investigation in the opinion of the
Company, it shall initiate and complete such
investigation at the earliest, in any case not
later than 30 days from the date of receipt of
last necessary document. In such cases, the
Company shall settle or reject the claim within
45 days from the date of receipt of last
necessary document.

IV. In case of delay beyond stipulated 45 days, the
Company shall be liable to pay interest to the
policyholder at a rate 2% above the bank rate
from the date of receipt of last necessary
document to the date of payment of claim.

(Explanation: "Bank rate" shall mean the rate
fixed by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) at the
beginning of the financial year in which claim
has fallen due)

Complete Discharge

Any payment to the policyholder, insured person or
his/ her nominees or his/her legal representative or
assignee or to the hospital as the case may be, for
any benefit under the Policy shall be a valid
discharge towards payment of claim by the
Company to the extent of that amount for the
particular claim

Multiple Policies

i. Incase of multiple policies taken by an insured
person during a period from one or more
insurers to indemnify treatment costs, the
insured person shall have the right to require a
settlement of his/her claim in terms of any of
his/her policies. In all such cases the insurer
chosen by the insured person shall be obliged
to settle the claim as long as the claim is within
the limits of and according to the terms of the
chosen policy.

ii. Insured Person having multiple policies shall
also have the right to prefer claims under this
policy for the amounts disallowed under any
other policy/ policies, even if the sum insured is
not exhausted. Then the Insurer shall
independently settle the claim subject to the
terms and conditions of this policy.

iii. If the amount to be claimed exceeds the sum
insured under a single policy, the insured
person shall have the right to choose insurers
from whom he/she wants to claim the balance
amount.

iv. Where an insured person has policies from
more than one insurer to cover the same risk
on indemnity basis, the insured person shall
only be indemnified the treatment costs in
accordance with the terms and conditions of
the chosen policy.

Fraud

If any claim made by the insured person, is in any
respect fraudulent, or if any false statement, or
declaration is made or used in support thereof, or if
any fraudulent means or devices are used by the
insured person or anyone acting on his/her behalf to
obtain any benefit under this policy, all benefits under
this policy andthe premium paid shall be forfeited.

Any amount already paid against claims made
under this policy but which are found fraudulent
later shall be repaid by all recipient(s) /
policyholder(s), who has made that particular
claim, who shall be jointly and severally liable for
such repayment to the insurer.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

21

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 22 of D5.pdf ---
For the purpose of this clause, the expression
"fraud" means any of the following acts committed
by the Insured Person or by his agent or the
hospital/doctor/any other party acting on behalf of
the insured person, with intent to deceive the
insurer or to induce the insurer to issue an
insurance Policy :-

a) the suggestion, as a fact of that which is not
true and which the Insured Person does not
believe to be true;

b) the active concealment of a fact by the Insured
Person having knowledge or belief of the fact;

c) anyother act fitted to deceive; and

d) any such act or omission as the law specially
declares to be fraudulent

The company shall not repudiate the claim and/or
forfeit the policy benefits on the ground of fraud, if
the insured person / beneficiary can prove that the
misstatement was true to the best of his
knowledge and there was no deliberate intention
to suppress the fact or that such mis-statement of
or suppression of material fact are within the
knowledge of the insurer.

7. Cancellation

a) The policyholder may cancel this Policy by giving
15 days' written notice, and in such an event, the
Company shall refund premium for the unexpired
Policy Period as detailed below.

Cancellation Period Refund %| Refund % | Refund %
for 1 year |for 2 years | for 3 years

tenure tenure tenure

policy policy policy

From 16 days to 1 month 80%
From 1monthto 3months 75%
From 3 months to 6 months 70%
From 6 months to 9 months 60%
From 9 months to 12 months 55%
From 12 months to 15 months 45%
From 15months to 18 months 40%
From 18 months to 21 months 35%
From 21 months to 24 months 25%
From 24 months to 27 months 20%
From 27 months to 30 months - - 10%
From 30 months to 33 months - - 5%
From 33 months to 36 months - - 0%

Notwithstanding anything contained herein or
otherwise, no refunds of premium shall be made in
respect of Cancellation where, any claim has been
admitted or has been lodged or any benefit has
been availed by the Insured person under the
Policy.

b) The Company may cancel the Policy at any time on
grounds of mis-representation, non-disclosure of
material facts, fraud by the Insured Person, by
giving 15 days' written notice. There would be no
refund of premium on cancellation on grounds of
mis-representation, non-disclosure of material
facts or fraud.

10.

11.

Golden Shield

Migration:

The insured person will have the option to migrate the
policy to other health insurance products/plans offered
by the company by applying for migration of the policy
at least 30 days before the policy renewal date as per
IRDAI guidelines on Migration. If such person is
presently covered and has been continuously covered
without any lapses under any health insurance
product/ plan offered by the company, the insured
person will get the accrued continuity benefits in
waiting periods as per IRDAI guidelines on migration.

For Detailed Guidelines on migration, kindly refer the link
https://www.irdai.gov.in/ADMINCMS/cms/frmGuidelines_Layo
ut.aspx?page=PageNo3987

Portability

The insured person will have the option to port the
policy to other insurers by applying to such insurer to
port the entire policy along with all the members of the
family, if any, at least 45 days before, but not earlier
than 60 days from the policy renewal date as per IRDAI
guidelines related to portability. If such person is
presently covered and has been continuously covered
without any lapses under any health insurance policy
with an Indian General/Health insurer, the proposed
insured person will get the accrued continuity benefits
in waiting periods as per IRDAI guidelines on
portability.

For Detailed Guidelines on portability, kindly refer the link

https:/Awww.irdai.gov.in/ADMINCMS/cms/frmGuidelin
es_Layout.aspx?page=PageNo3987

Renewal of Policy

The policy shall ordinarily be renewable except on
grounds of fraud, misrepresentation by the insured
person

The Company shall endeavor to give notice for
renewal. However, the Company is not under
obligation to give any notice for renewal.

ii. Renewal shall not be denied on the ground that the
insured person had made a claim or claims in the
preceding policy years.

iii. Request for renewal along with requisite premium
shall be received by the Company before the end of
the policy period.

iv. At the end of the policy period, the policy shall
terminate and can be renewed within the Grace
Period of 30 days to maintain continuity of benefits
without break in policy. Coverage is not available
during the grace period.

v. No loading shall apply on renewals based on
individual claims experience.

Withdrawal of Policy

i. Inthe likelihood of this product being withdrawn in
future, the Company will intimate the insured
person about the same 90 days prior to expiry of
the policy.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

22

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 23 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

12.

13.

14.

ii. Insured Person will have the option to migrate to
similar health insurance product available with the
Company at the time of renewal with all the
accrued continuity benefits such as cumulative
bonus, waiver of waiting period as per IRDAI
guidelines, provided the policy has been
maintained without a break.

Moratorium Period

After completion of eight continuous years under this
policy no look back would be applied. This period of
eight years is called as moratorium period. The
moratorium would be applicable for the sums insured
of the first policy and subsequently completion of 8
continuous years would be applicable from date of
enhancement of sum insured only on the enhanced
limits. After the expiry of Moratorium Period no health
insurance claim shall be contestable except for proven
fraud and permanent exclusions specified in the policy
contract. The policies would however be subject to alll
limits, sub limits, co-payments, deductibles as per the
policy contract

Premium Payment in Instalments (Wherever
applicable)

If the insured person has opted for Payment of
Premium on an instalment basis i.e. Half Yearly,
Quarterly or Monthly, as mentioned in the policy
Schedule/Certificate of Insurance, the following
Conditions shall apply (notwithstanding any terms
contrary elsewhere in the policy)

i. Grace Period of 15 days would be given to pay the
instalment premium due for the policy.

ii. During such grace period, coverage will not be
available from the due date of instalment premium
tillthe date of receipt of premium by Company.

iii. The insured person will get the accrued continuity
benefit in respect of the "Waiting Periods",
"Specific Waiting Periods" in the event of payment
of premium within the stipulated grace Period.

iv. No interest will be charged If the instalment
premium is not paid on due date.

v. In case of instalment premium due not received
within the grace period, the policy will get
cancelled.

vi. In the event of a claim, all subsequent premium
instalments shall immediately become due and
payable.

vii. The company has the right to recover and deduct
all the pending instalments from the claim amount
due under the policy.

Possibility of Revision of Terms of the Policy Including
the Premium Rates

The Company, with prior approval of IRDAI, may revise
or modify the terms of the policy including the premium
rates. The insured person shall be notified three
months before the changes are effected.

15.

16.

Free look period

The Free Look Period shall be applicable on new
individual health insurance policies and not on
renewals or at the time of porting/migrating the policy.

The insured person shall be allowed free look period of
fifteen days from date of receipt of the Policy
documents to review the terms and conditions of the
Policy, and to return the same if not acceptable.

If the insured has not made any claim during the Free
Look Period, the insured shall be entitled to

a) arefund of the premium paid less any expenses
incurred by the company on medical examination
of the insured person and the stamp duty charges;
or

b) where the risk has already commenced and the
option of return of the Policy is exercised by the
insured person, a deduction towards the
proportionate risk premium for period of cover or

c) where only a part of the insurance coverage has
commenced, such proportionate premium
commensurate with the insurance coverage
during such period;

Redressal of Grievances

In case of any grievance the insured person may
contact the company through

Website : www.icicilombard.com
Toll Free: 1800 2666
E-Mail : customersupport@icicilombard.com

Courier :ICIClLombard General Insurance Company Ltd.
ICICI Lombard House,
414, Veer Savarkar Marg,
Near Siddhi Vinayak Temple,
Prabhadevi, Mumbai- 400025

Insured person may also approach the grievance cell at
any of the company's branches with the details of
grievance.

If Insured person is not satisfied with the redressal of
grievance through one of the above methods, insured
person may contact the grievance officer at:

Manager- Service Quality,
Corporate Manager- Service Quality,

National Manager- Operations &

finally Director-services and Business development at
the following address:

ICICl Lombard General Insurance Company Limited,
ICICl Lombard House,

414, Veer Savarkar Marg,

Near Siddhi Vinayak Temple,

Prabhadevi, Mumbai - 400 025.

For updated details of grievance officer, kindly refer the link

https:/www.icicilombard.com/grievance-redressal

If Insured person is not satisfied with the redressal of
grievance through above methods, the insured person

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

23

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 24 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

17.

may also approach the office of Insurance
Ombudsman of the respective area/region for
redressal of grievance as per Insurance Ombudsman
Rules 2017. Grievance may also be lodged at IRDAI
Integrated Grievance Management System
https://igms.irda.gov.in

Nomination:

The policyholder is required at the inception of the
policy to make a nomination for the purpose of
payment of claims under the policy in the event of
death of the policyholder. Any change of nomination
shall be communicated to the company in writing and
such change shall be effective only when an
endorsement on the policy is made. In the event of
death of the policyholder, the Company will pay the
nominee {as named in the Policy Schedule/Policy
Certificate/Endorsement (if any)} and in case there is no
subsisting nominee, to the legal heirs or legal
representatives of the policyholder whose discharge
shall be treated as full and final discharge of its liability
under the policy.

ii. Specific terms and clauses (terms and other clauses
other than those mentioned above under f. |. above)

18.

Zone based Premium

This Policy only covers medical treatment taken within
India arising during the Policy Period. All payments
under this Policy will only be made in Indian Rupees
within India.

The construction, interpretation and meaning of the
provisions of this Policy shall be determined in
accordance with Indian law.

For the purpose of Policy issuance, the premium will be
computed basis the zone chosen by the Insured Person
in the proposal form. The premium that would be
applicable zone wise and the cities defined in each
zone are as under:

e Zone A- NCR*, Mumbai, Thane District,, Navi
Mumbai, Gujarat, Kolkata

e Zone B- Hyderabad, Secunderabad, Chhattisgarh,
Madhya Pradesh, Daman & Diu, Dadar & Nagar
Haveli, Goa, Maharashtra (excluding Mumbai,
Thane District, Navi Mumbai)

e ZoneC-Restof India

NCR* includes Includes Delhi and the following
districts: Faridabad, Gurgaon/Gurugram, Mewat,
Rohtak, Sonipat, Panipat, Jhajjhar, Palwal, Karnal,
Ghaziabad, Noida/Gautam Budh Nagar, Bulandshahr,
Baghpat, Hapur, Shamli, Muzaffarnagar

Additional zone based Co-Payment would be levied on
each and every claim (over and above the base co-
payment opted by the Insured person) in case
medically necessary treatment has been taken in a
zone higher (Zone A being the highest followed by
Zone B and then Zone C) than the zone for which
premium has been paid on issuance of the policy. Zone

19.

20.

21.

22.

based co-payment shall not be applicable in case of
medically necessary treatment taken for road traffic
accidents.

The additional zone based co-payment that will be levied will
be as per tables mentioned below

Additional zone based Co-Payment Grid

Treatment Zone opted at
taken in Zone policy issuance
A B
A 0% 15.0%
B Nil additional 0%
co-payment
Cc Nil additional | Nil additional
co-payment | co-payment

Please refer to the claim illustrations as detailed in g.
other terms and conditions 1. Claim Administration for
further understanding

Conditional Underwriting
Risk based loading:

We may apply a risk loading on the premium payable
(based on the declarations made in the proposal form
and the health status of the persons proposed for
insurance) at the Commencement Date or on any
renewal of the Policy with Us or on the receipt of a
request for enhancing the Annual Sum Insured. The
maximum risk loading applicable for an individual will
not exceed 100% per diagnosis / medical condition and
an overall risk loading of 200% per individual.

We will send You the applicable risk loading in writing
via a counter offer letter. You shall give Us Your consent
and the additional premium (if any), within 15 days of
the issuance of Our Counter offer letter.

If You neither accept Our letter nor revert to Us within
15 days, We will cancel Your application and refund the
premium paid within the next 7 days.

Material Change

The Insured shall notify the Company in writing of any
material change in the risk in relation to the declaration
made in the proposal form or medical examination
report at each Renewal and the Company may, adjust
the scope of cover and/or premium, if necessary,
accordingly.

Records to be Maintained

The Insured Person shall keep an accurate record
containing all relevant medical records and shall allow
the Company or its representatives to inspect such
records. The Proposer or Insured Person shall furnish
such information as the Company may require for
settlement of any claim under the Policy, within
reasonable time limit and within the time limit specified
in the Policy.

Notice & Communication

i. Any notice, direction, instruction or any other
communication related to the Policy should be
made in writing.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

24

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 25 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

23.

24,

25.

26.

ii. Such communication shall be sent to the address
of the Company or through any other electronic
modes specified in the Policy Schedule.

iii. The Company shall communicate to the Insured at
the address or through any other electronic mode
mentioned in the schedule.

Territorial Limit

All medical treatment for the purpose of this insurance
will have to be taken in India only.

Automatic change in Coverage under the policy

The coverage for the Insured Person(s) shall
automatically terminate:

i. Inthecase of his/her (Insured Person) demise.

However the cover shall continue for the remaining
Insured Persons till the end of Policy Period. The
other insured persons may also apply to renew the
policy. In case, the other insured person is minor,
the policy shall be renewed only through any one
of his/her natural guardian or guardian appointed
by court. All relevant particulars in respect of such
person (including his/her relationship with the
insured person) must be submitted to the company
along with the application. Provided no claim has
been made, and termination takes place on
account of death of the insured person, pro-rata
refund of premium of the deceased insured person
for the balance period of the policy will be effective.

ii. Upon exhaustion of sum insured and additional
sum insured (if any), for the policy year. However,
the policy is subject to renewal on the due date as
per the applicable terms and conditions.

Territorial Jurisdiction

All disputes or differences under or in relation to the
interpretation of the terms, conditions, validity,
construct, limitations and/or exclusions contained in
the Policy shall be determined by the Indian court and
according to Indian law.

Arbitration

i. If any dispute or difference shall arise as to the
quantum to be paid by the Policy, (liability being
otherwise admitted) such difference shall
independently of all other questions, be referred to
the decision of a sole arbitrator to be appointed in
writing by the parties here to or if they cannot
agree upon a single arbitrator within thirty days of
any party invoking arbitration, the same shall be
referred to a panel of three arbitrators, comprising
two arbitrators, one to be appointed by each of the
parties to the dispute/difference and the third
arbitrator to be appointed by such two arbitrators
and arbitration shall be conducted under and in
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration

27.

28.

29.

30.

and Conciliation Act 1996, as amended by
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act,
2015 (No. 3 of 2016).

ii. It is clearly agreed and understood that no difference
or dispute shall be preferable to arbitration as herein
before provided, if the Company has disputed or not
accepted liability under or in respect of the policy, iii. It
is hereby expressly stipulated and declared that it
shall be a condition precedent to any right of action or
suit upon the policy that award by such arbitrator /
arbitrators of the amount of expenses shall be first
obtained.

Policy alignment

Policy Alignment option will be available in cases
wherein insured(s) with two separate health indemnity
policies with Us, having different policy end dates but
want to align the policy start dates. We can align the
policies by extending the coverage of one policy till the
end date of the other policy.

Such policies will be charged with premium on pro rata
basis though the sum insured under the policy shall
remain constant.

Endorsements (Changes in Policy)

i. This policy constitutes the complete contract of
insurance. This Policy cannot be modified by
anyone (including an insurance agent or broker)
except the company. Any change made by the
company shall be evidenced by a written
endorsement signed and stamped.

ii. The proposer may be changed only at the time of
renewal. The new proposer must be the legal
heir/immediate family member. Such change
would be subject to acceptance by the company
and payment of premium (if any). The renewed
Policy shall be treated as having been renewed
without break.

iii. The proposer may be changed during the Policy
Period only in case of his/her demise or him/her
moving out of India.

iv. Mid-term endorsement of addition of members in
the policy shall not be permitted

Change of Sum Insured

Sum insured can be changed (increased/ decreased)
only at the time of renewal subject to underwriting by
the Company. For any increase in SI, the waiting period
shall start afresh only for the enhanced portion of the
sum insured.

Non Payables

Below are the non-payable items applicable in the
policy. The list may be updated as per the direction of
Authority, for updated list please visit our website:
www.iciciclombard.com

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

25

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 26 of D5.pdf ---
List of Non Payable Items as per IRDAI (Contd.)

Golden Shield
List of Non Payable Items as per IRDAI
Sr.No. | Items
1 BABY FOOD
2 BABY UTILITIES CHARGES
3 BEAUTY SERVICES
4 BELTS/ BRACES
5 BUDS
6 COLD PACK/HOT PACK
7 CARRY BAGS
8 EMAIL/INTERNET CHARGES
9 FOOD CHARGES (OTHER THAN PATIENT’s DIET
PROVIDED BY HOSPITAL)
10 LEGGINGS
11 LAUNDRY CHARGES
12 MINERAL WATER
13 SANITARY PAD
14 TELEPHONE CHARGES
15 GUEST SERVICES
16 CREPE BANDAGE
17 DIAPER OF ANY TYPE
18 EYELET COLLAR
19 SLINGS
20 BLOOD GROUPING AND CROSS MATCHING OF
DONORS SAMPLES
21 SERVICE CHARGES WHERE NURSING CHARGE
ALSO CHARGED
22 Television Charges
23 SURCHARGES
24 ATTENDANT CHARGES
25 EXTRA DIET OF PATIENT (OTHER THAN THAT
WHICH FORMS PART OF BED
26 BIRTH CERTIFICATE
27 CERTIFICATE CHARGES
28 COURIER CHARGES
29 CONVEYANCE CHARGES
30 MEDICAL CERTIFICATE
31 MEDICAL RECORDS
32 PHOTOCOPIES CHARGES
33 MORTUARY CHARGES
34 WALKING AIDS CHARGES
35 OXYGEN CYLINDER (FOR USAGE OUTSIDE THE
HOSPITAL)
36 SPACER
37 SPIROMETRE
38 NEBULIZER KIT
39 STEAMINHALER
40 ARMSLING
41 THERMOMETER
42 CERVICAL COLLAR
43 SPLINT
44 DIABETIC FOOT WEAR
45 KNEE BRACES (LONG/SHORT/ HINGED)
46 KNEE IMMOBILIZER/SHOULDER IMMOBILIZER
47 LUMBO SACRAL BELT

Sr.No. | Items

48 NIMBUS BED OR WATER OR AIR BED CHARGES

49 AMBULANCE COLLAR

50 AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT

51 ABDOMINAL BINDER

52 PRIVATE NURSES CHARGES- SPECIAL NURSING
CHARGES

53 SUGAR FREE Tablets

54 CREAMS POWDERS LOTIONS (Toiletries are not
payable, only prescribed medical pharmaceuticals
payable)

55 ECG ELECTRODES

56 GLOVES

57 NEBULISATION KIT

58 RECOVERY KIT, ETCJANY KIT WITH NO DETAILS
MENTIONED [DELIVERY KIT, ORTHOKIT,

59 KIDNEY TRAY

60 MASK

61 OUNCE GLASS

62 OXYGEN MASK

63 PELVIC TRACTION BELT

64 PAN CAN

65 TROLLY COVER

66 UROMETER, URINE JUG

67 AMBULANCE

68 VASOFIX SAFETY

f. Other Terms and Conditions

1.

Claim Administration
The fulfilment of the terms and conditions of this
Policy (including payment of premium by the due
dates mentioned in the Policy Schedule) insofar as
they relate to anything to be done or complied with
by each of You shall be conditions precedent to
admission of Our liability. You are requested to go
through our list of de-listed/excluded providers
which is available on our website. As the list is
dynamic, please refer to the latest list.

The claim pay-out would be adjudicated in

following sequence:

i. lf aroom/ICU accommodation has been opted
for where the room rent or category is higher
than the eligible limit as applicable for the
Insured Person, then the associated medical
expenses payable shall be pro-rated as per
applicable limits.

ii. Associated medical expenses means those
expenses as listed below which vary in
accordance with the room rent or room
category or ICU Charges ina hospital:

a. Room, boarding, nursing and operation
theatre expenses as charged by the
Hospital where the insured person availed
treatment

b. Intensive care unit (ICU) Charges

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

26

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 27 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

c. Fees charged by surgeon, anesthetist,
medical practitioner

d. Investigation expenses

iii. Zone based co-payment shall be applicable in
all cases (Except medically necessary
treatment for road traffic accidents) where
treatment is taken in a zone higher than for
which premium was paid for

iv. The voluntary deductible shall be applied to
aggregate of all claims that are either paid or
payable (not excluded) under this policy. Our
liability to make payment shall commence only
once the aggregate amount of all claims
payable or paid exceed the voluntary
deductible. Base Co-payment shall not be

applied incase voluntary deductible has been
opted for.

v. Base Co-payment shall be applicable on the
amount payable by Us and our liability to
make payment shall than be arrived at.

vi. In case, the claim is for a Procedure/Medical
Condition/Ailment/Disease which is subject to
sub-limits as per policy terms and conditions,
the claim will be settled to the extent of
amount which is lesser of the three amounts —
i.e. claimed amount or maximum amount as
per sub-limits applicable or ICICI Lombard
Liability after deduction of base co-payment/
voluntary deductible.

Illustrations for claim settlement

Illustration 1 - Insured Person opted for base co-payment

Heading Particulars Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3
A. Annual Sum Insured = 10,00,000 = 10,00,000 = 10,00,000
B. Base Co-payment opted at time of policy issuance 20% 20% 20%

Zone opted B (Goa) B (Goa) B (Goa)
Hospitalization Diagnosis Heart Attack/ Heart Attack/ Heart Attack/
PTCA done/ PTCA done/ PTCA done/
Cardiovascular Cardiovascular Cardiovascular
disease disease disease
Treatment taken in Goa (Zone B) Mumbai (Zone A) Guwahati (Zone C)
Cc. Hospitalisation expenses Amount = 4,00,000 = 5,00,000 = 3,00,000
Dz. Pre and Post hospitalisation expenses % 35,000 = 50,000 = 20,000
E. Total claimed Expenses*[C+D] % 435,000 = 5,50,000 % 3,20,000
F. Zone based co-payment 0% 15% 0%
G. Claimed amount after application of zone based co-payment % 4,35,000 = 4,67,500 & 3,20,000
[E*F]
H. Sub-limit for cardiovascular diseases = 3,50,000 = 3,50,000 = 3,50,000
I. Insured Person liability after application of base co-payment = 87,000 = 93,500 = 64,000
[G*B]
ICICI Lombard Liability after deduction of co-payment [G-I] % 3,48,000 = 3,74,000 = 2,56,000
K. Final payable amount to Insured Person [lesser amount out of G, H, J] = 3,48,000 = 3,50,000 % 2,56,000
L. Balance Annual Sum Insured [A-K] = 6,52,000 = 6,50,000 = 7,44,000

*lt has been assumed that total claimed expenses are same as total payable expenses. i.e. there are no deductions in the claimed amount.

Illustration 2 - Insured person opted for voluntary deductible

Heading Particulars Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3
A. Annual Sum Insured = 20,00,000 = 20,00,000 = 20,00,000
B. Voluntary deductible opted at time of policy issuance = 4,00,000 = 4,00,000 X= 4,00,000
on Base Co-payment applicable NA NA NA
Zone opted B (Goa) B (Goa) B (Goa)
Hospitalization Diagnosis Heart Attack/ Heart Attack/ Heart Attack/
PTCA done/ PTCA done/ PTCA done/
Cardiovascular Cardiovascular Cardiovascular
disease disease disease
Treatment taken in Goa (Zone B) Mumbai (Zone A) | Guwahati (Zone C)
UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223 27 CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 28 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield
Illustrations for claim settlement (Contd.)
Illustration 2 - Insured person opted for voluntary deductible (Contd.)
Heading Particulars Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3
D. Hospitalisation expenses Amount = 4,00,000 = 5,00,000 & 3,00,000
E. Pre and Post hospitalisation expenses = 35,000 = 50,000 = 20,000
F. Total claimed Expenses*[D+E] = 4,35,000 = 5,50,000 % 3,20,000
G. Zone based co-payment 0% 15% 0%
H. Claimed amount after application of zone based co-payment = 4,35,000 = 4,67,500 % 3,20,000
[F*G]
I. IL Liability after application of voluntary deductible [H-B] = 35,000 = 67,500 NA as
expenses have
not crossed
voluntary
deductible
amount
J. Sub-limit for cardiovascular diseases = 3,50,000 = 3,50,000 % 3,50,000
K. Final payable amount to Insured Person [lesser amount out of I,J] =~ 35,000 = 67,500 -
L. Balance Annual Sum Insured [A-K] % 19,65,000 % 19,32,500 = 20,00,000

*It has been assumed that total claimed expenses are same as total payable expenses. i.e. there are no deductions in the claimed amount.

The claim amount assessed above would be deducted from the
following amounts in the following progressive order:

1.
2.

3.

Annual Sum Insured
Additional Sum Insured/Cumulative Bonus (if accrued and

available)

Reset Sum Insured (If applicable)

Further, upon the discovery or happening of any Illness or Injury
that may give rise to a Claim under this Policy, then as a
condition precedent to the admission of Our liability, You shall
undertake the following:

1.1 Claims Procedure

A. For Cashless Settlement

Cashless treatment is only available at a Network
Provider (List of Network Providers is available at our
website). In order to avail of cashless treatment, the
following procedure must be followed by You:

Pre-authorization

Prior to taking treatment and/ or incurring Medical
Expenses at a Network Provider, You must contact Us
or Our in house claim processing team accompanied
with full particulars namely, Policy Number, Your name,
Your relationship with Policy Holder, nature of Illness or
Injury, name and address of the Medical Practitioner/
Hospital and any other information that may be
relevant to the Illness/ Injury/ Hospitalisation. You must
request preauthorization at least 48 hours before a
planned Hospitalization and in case of an emergency
situation, within 24 hours of Hospitalization. To avail of
Cashless Hospitalization facility, you are required to
produce the health card, as provided to You with this
Policy, subject to the terms and conditions for the
usage of the said health card Or You can seek pre

authorization by providing Your Policy number and ID
proof to the hospital who can co-ordinate with Our
claim team to provide cashless facility. We will consider
Your request after having obtained accurate and
complete information for the Illness or Injury for which
cashless Hospitalization facility is sought by You and
We will confirm Your request in writing.

B. ForReimbursement Settlement

i. You shall give notice to Us or Our in house claim
processing team by calling the toll free number
1800 2666 or emailing us at as
customersupport@icicilombard.com specified in
the Policy provided to You and also in writing at
Our address with particulars as below:

“* Policy number;

“« Your Name;

¢* Your relationship with the Policyholder;
“Nature of Illness or Injury;

“+ Name and address of the attending Medical
Practitioner and the Hospital;

“Any other information that may be relevant to
the Illness/Injury/ Hospitalisation

The above information needs to be provided to Us
or Ourin house claim processing team immediately
and in any event within 10 days of Hospitalization,
failing which We will have the right to treat the
Claim as inadmissible, as We may deem fit at Our
sole discretion.

ii You must immediately consult a Medical
Practitioner and follow the advice and treatment
that he recommends.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

28

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 29 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

You or someone claiming on Your behalf must promptly
and in any event within 30 days of Your discharge from
a Hospital (for post-hospitalization expenses, within
30 days from the completion of post-hospitalization
period) deliver to Us the documentation (written details
of the quantum of any Claim along with all original
supporting documentation) as more particularly listed
in Claim documents section. In case there is a delay
beyond 30 days in submission of claim documents, we
may condone the delay provided the insured person
submits a valid reason justifying the delay to us in
writing. However, in both the above cases i.e.
g.1.1.1(A) & (B), You must take reasonable steps or
measure to minimise the quantum of any Claim that
may be covered under the Policy If so requested by Us
or Our in house claim processing team, You will have to
undergo a medical examination from Our nominated
Medical Practitioner, as and when We or Our in house
claim processing team considers reasonable and
necessary. The cost of such examination will be borne
by Us.

Claim falling in two Policy periods

If the claim event falls within two Policy periods, the claims
shall be paid taking into consideration the available Sum
Insured in the two Policy periods, including the Deductions
for each Policy Period. Such eligible claim amount to be
payable to the Insured shall be reduced to the extent of
premium to be received for the Renewal/due date of
premium of health insurance Policy, if not received earlier.

1.2 CLAIM DOCUMENTS

You shall be required to furnish the following documents for
orin support of a Claim:

vi.

vil.

Duly completed Claim form signed by You and the
Medical Practitioner. The claim form can be
downloaded from our website www.icicilombard.com.

Original bills, receipts and discharge certificate/ card
from the Hospital/ Medical Practitioner.

Original bills from chemists supported by proper
prescription.

Original investigation test reports and payment
receipts.

Indoor case papers

Medical Practitioner's referral letter advising
Hospitalization in non-Accident cases.

Any other document as required by Us or Our TPA to
investigate the Claim or Our obligation to make
payment for it

1.3 Claim Service Guarantee

We provide You Claim Service Guarantee as follows

A.

For Reimbursement Claims: We shall make the
payment of admissible claim (as perterms & conditions

of Policy) OR communicate non admissibility of claim
within 14 days after You submit complete set of
documents & information in respect of the claims. In
case We fail to make the payment of admissible claims
or to communicate non admissibility of claim within the
time period, We shall pay 2% interest over and above
the rate defined as per IRDAI (Protection of
Policyholder's interest) Regulation 2017.

For Cashless Claims: If You notify pre authorization
request for cashless facility through any of Our
empanelled network hospitals along with complete set
of documents & information, We will respond within 4
hours of the actual receipt of such pre authorization
request with:

a. Approval, or
b. Rejection, or
c. Query seeking further information

In case the request is for enhancement, i.e. Request
for increase in the amount already authorized, We
will respond to it within 3 hours.

In case of delay in response by Us beyond the time
period as stated above for cashless claims, We
shall be liable to pay = 1,000 to You. Our maximum
liability in respect of a single hospitalization shall,
at no time exceed % 1,000. We will not be liable to
make any payments under this Claim Service
Guarantee in case of any force majeure, natural
event or manmade disturbance which impedes
Our inability to make a decision or to communicate
such decisions to You.

The service guarantee shall not be applicable for
any cases delayed on account of reasonable
apprehension of fraud or fraudulent claims or
cases referred to/by any adjudicative forum for
necessary disposal.

You may lodge claim separately for the
hospitalization claim, Pre-Post hospitalization. In
such scenario, if delay happens beyond the time
period as specified above, the interest amount
calculated will be on the net sanctioned amount of
respective transaction and not the total amount
paid for the entire claim.

Any amount paid towards interest under Claim
Service Guarantee will not affect the Annual Sum
Insured as specified in the Schedule.

If you are not eligible for 'Claim Service Guarantee’
for the reasons stated above, We will inform the
same to You, within 14 days in case of A. For
Reimbursement claims and within 4 hours in case
of B. For Cashless claims above.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

29

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 30 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

Annexure A

Jurisdiction of Office
Union Territory, District)

AHMEDABAD - Shri Kuldip Singh

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Jeevan Prakash Building, 6th Floor, Tilak
Marg, Relief Road, Anmedabad - 380 001.
Tel.: 079 - 25501201/02/05/06

Email: bimalokpal.ahmedabad@cioins.co.in

BENGALURU

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,

Jeevan Soudha Building, PID No. 57-27-N-19,
Ground Floor, 19/19, 24th Main Road,

JP Nagar, Ist Phase, Bengaluru - 560 078.
Tel.: 080 - 26652048 / 26652049

Email: bimalokpal.bengaluru@cioins.co.in

Office Details

Gujarat, Dadra &
Nagar Haveli, Daman
and Diu.

Karnataka.

BHOPAL

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,

Janak Vihar Complex, 2nd Floor, 6, Malviya
Nagar, Opp. Airtel Office, Near New Market,
Bhopal — 462 003.

Tel.: 0755 - 2769201 /2769202

Fax: 0755 - 2769203

Email: bimalokpal.bhopal@cioins.co.in

BHUBANESHWAR - Shri Suresh Chandra
Panda

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman, 62,
Forest park, Bhubneshwar — 751 009.

Tel.: 0674 - 2596461 /2596455

Fax: 0674 - 2596429

Email: bimalokpal.bhubaneswar@cioins.co.in

CHANDIGARH

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
S.C.O. No. 101, 102 & 103, 2nd Floor,

Batra Building, Sector 17-D,

Chandigarh - 160017.

Tel.:0172 - 2706196 / 2706468

Fax: 0172 - 2708274

Email: bimalokpal.chandigarh@cioins.co.in

CHENNAI

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Fatima Akhtar Court, 4th Floor, 453,

Anna Salai, Teynampet, Chennai - 600 018.
Tel.: 044 - 24333668 / 24335284

Fax: 044 - 24333664

Email: bimalokpal.chennai@cioins.co.in

Madhya Pradesh
Chattisgarh.

Orissa.

Punjab, Haryana
(excluding Gurugram,
Faridabad, Sonepat
and Bahadurgarh)
Himachal Pradesh,
Union Territories of
Jammu & Kashmir,
Ladakh &
Chandigarh.

Tamil Nadu, Tamil
Nadu Puducherry
Town and Karaikal
(which are part of
Puducherry).

DELHI - Shri Sudhir Krishna

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
2/2 A, Universal Insurance Building,
Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi - 110 002.
Tel.: 011 - 23232481/23213504
Email: bimalokpal.delhi@cioins.co.in

GUWAHATI

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Jeevan Nivesh, 5th Floor, Nr. Panbazar over
Bridge, S. S. Road, Guwahati -781001
(ASSAM).

Tel.: 0361 - 2632204/ 2602205

Email: bimalokpal.guwahati@cioins.co.in

Delhi & Following
Districts of Haryana
- Gurugram,
Faridabad, Sonepat
& Bahadurgarh.

Assam, Meghalaya,
Manipur, Mizoram,
Arunachal Pradesh,
Nagaland and
Tripura.

HYDERABAD

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
6-2-46, 1st floor, “Moin Court”, Lane Opp.
Saleem Function Palace, A. C. Guards,
Lakdi-Ka-Pool, Hyderabad - 500 004.
Tel.: 040 - 23312122 Fax: 040 - 23376599
Email: bimalokpal.hyderabad@cioins.co.in

Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Yanam
and part of Union
Territory of
Puducherry.

Jurisdiction of Office
Union Territory, District)

JAIPUR

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Jeevan Nidhi - II Bldg., Gr. Floor, Bhawani
Singh Marg, Jaipur - 302 005.

Tel.: 0141 - 2740363

Email: bimalokpal.jaipur@cioins.co.in

ERNAKULAM - Ms. Poonam Bodra

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,

2nd Floor, Pulinat Bldg., Opp. Cochin
Shipyard, M. G. Road, Ernakulam - 682 015.
Tel.: 0484 - 2358759 / 2359338

Fax: 0484 - 2359336

Email: bimalokpal.ernakulam@cioins.co.in

KOLKATA - Shri P. K. Rath

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Hindustan Bldg. Annexe, 4th Floor,

4, C.R. Avenue, KOLKATA - 700 072.
Tel.: 033 - 22124339 / 22124340

Fax: 033 - 22124341

Email: bimalokpal.kolkata@cioins.co.in

LUCKNOW - Shri Justice Anil Kumar
Srivastava

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
6th Floor, Jeevan Bhawan, Phase-ll,
Nawal Kishore Road, Hazratganj,
Lucknow - 226 001.

Tel.: 0522 - 2231330/ 2231331

Fax: 0522 - 2231310

Email: bimalokpal.lucknow@cioins.co.in

MUMBAI

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,

3rd Floor, Jeevan Seva Annexe, S. V. Road,
Santacruz (W), Mumbai - 400 054.

Tel.: 022 - 26106552 / 26106960

Fax: 022 - 26106052

Email: bimalokpal.mumbai@cioins.co.in

Office Details

Rajasthan.

Kerala, Lakshadweep,
Mahe-a part of Union
Territory of
Puducherry.

West Bengal, Sikkim,
Andaman & Nicobar
Islands.

Districts of Uttar
Pradesh: Lalitpur,
Jhansi, Mahoba,
Hamirpur, Banda,
Chitrakoot,
Allahabad, Mirzapur,
Sonbhabdra,
Fatehpur, Pratapgarh,
Jaunpur,Varanasi,
Gazipur, Jalaun,
Kanpur, Lucknow,
Unnao, Sitapur,
Lakhimpur, Bahraich,
Barabanki, Raebareli,
Sravasti, Gonda,
Faizabad, Amethi,
Kaushambi,
Balrampur, Basti,
Ambedkarnagar,
Sultanpur,
Maharajgang,
Santkabirnagar,
Azamgarh,
Kushinagar,
Gorkhpur, Deoria,
Mau, Ghazipur,
Chandauli, Ballia,
Sidharathnagar.

Goa, Mumbai
Metropolitan Region
excluding Navi
Mumbai & Thane.

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223

30

CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408

--- Page 31 of D5.pdf ---
Golden Shield

Annexure A (Contd.)

Jurisdiction of Office
Union Territory, District)

NOIDA - Shri Chandra Shekhar Prasad

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Bhagwan Sahai Palace, 4th Floor, Main
Road, Naya Bans, Sector 15, Distt: Gautam
Buddh Nagar, U.P-201301.

Tel.: 0120-2514252/2514253

Email: bimalokpal.noida@cioins.co.in

Office Details

State of Uttaranchal
and the following
Districts of Uttar
Pradesh: Agra,
Aligarh, Bagpat,
Bareilly, Bijnor,
Budaun,
Bulandshehar, Etah,
Kanooj, Mainpuri,
Mathura, Meerut,
Moradabad,
Muzaffarnagar,
Oraiyya, Pilibhit,
Etawah, Farrukhabad,
Firozbad,
Gautambodhanagor,
Ghaziabad, Hardoi,
Shahjahanpur, Hapur,
Shamli, Rampur,
Kashganj, Sambhal,
Amroha, Hathras,
Kanshiramnagar,
Saharanpur.

Jurisdiction of Office
Union Territory, District)

PATNA - Shri N. K. Singh

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
1st Floor, Kalpana Arcade Building,

Bazar Samiti Road, Bahadurpur,
Patna 800 006. Tel.: 0612-2680952
Email: bimalokpal.patna@cioins.co.in

PUNE - Shri Vinay Sah

Office of the Insurance Ombudsman,
Jeevan Darshan Bldg., 3rd Floor,

C.T.S. No.s. 195 to 198, N. C. Kelkar Road,
Narayan Peth, Pune - 411 030.

Tel.: 020-41312555

Email: bimalokpal.pune@cioins.co.in

Office Details

Bihar, Jharkhand.

Maharashtra, Area of
Navi Mumbai and
Thane excluding
Mumbai Metropolitan
Region.

1] icici @Lombard
Nibhaye Vaade

ICICI Lombard General Insurance Company Limited

Mailing Address : 601 & 602, 6th Floor, Interface 16, New Linking Road, Malad (West), Mumbai - 400 064.
Corporate Office : ICICI] Lombard House, 414, Veer Savarkar Marg, Near Siddhi Vinayak Temple, Prabhadevi, Mumbai 400 025.
Visit us at www.icicilombard.com e Mail us at customersupport@icicilombard.com e Toll Free No.: 1800 2666 (Toll Free also accessible from your mobile)
Insurance is the subject matter of solicitation. IRDA Reg. No. 115 UIN: ICIHLIP22012V012223

UIN : ICIHLIP22012V012223 31 CIN: L67200MH2000PLC129408